The Time-stamp: line indicates when this file was last modified.
Time-stamp: <2024-05-12 10:44:26 james>

The MySC package is CSSC's ancestor.  MySC compiled under GCC 2.4.5
(but not GCC 2.7.x), and was written by Ross Ridge.

The "sccs" program and its accompanying documentation were written by
Eric Allman, and are copyright (C) 1980, 1993 The Regents of the
University of California.  See the file ``COPYING.bsd'' for more
information.

The CGI script "sccs.cgi" and its associated documentation was written
by Richard Kettlewell <rjk@greenend.org.uk> and is Copyright 2001
Richard Kettlewell.

This package was for all intents and purposes written (that is,
updated for modern C++ compilers, fixed, enhanced, made more portable,
ported, fixed and documented) by James Youngman, <jay@gnu.org>.  James
also added a test suite, wrote the test cases, converted the package
to use GNU Autoconf and GNU Automake, and wrote the manual.  He's the
current maintainer.  Only (and all) code still in the Kernighan and
Ritchie format is still left over from MySC.  New code is indented
according to the GNU specification (this is used as a device for
keeping track of the provenance of the code).

Larry McVoy has provided explanations of some aspects of the operation
of "genuine" SCCS, and other valuable help.  Larry is the author of
another SCCS clone, as a side effect of a more significant project.
See http://www.bitmover.com/ for more details.

Lars Hecking <lhecking@nmrc.ucc.ie> provided valuable help with
Autoconf and portability information for Solaris, SunOS, AmigaOS, and
IRIX.  Plus, lots and *lots* of testing and useful bug reports.


Dave Bodenstab <imdave@mcs.net> is to be thanked for providing patches
for FreeBSD-2.0.5 support -- these were largely to fix silly
assumptions (location of "true", GCC-2.6.3 support), nothing catering
to FreeBSD especially.

Malcolm Boff <Malcolm_Boff@compuserve.com> provided a useful bug
report for FreeBSD (apparently "echo -e -n" is invalid; the options
are exclusive).

Richard Polton <richardp@scopic.com> provided Solaris testing, plus
testing with gigantic inputs, and rewrote sccsdiff, also supplying
test cases for it (in fact the only person so far [as of 1998-06-16]
to do so!)  Richard also submitted code to remove the "xalloc"
wrappers for operator ::new so that all the code now uses new and
delete rather than a mixture of that and xalloc()/free().

Support for development snapshots of GCC (as of 1997-08-11) was
contributed by Fila Kolodny <fila@ibi.com>.

Peter Kjellerstedt <Peter.Kjellerstedt@axis.com> has provided many
concise and useful bug reports, mostly with patches.  In particular,
he has provided patches that allow CSSC to fix SCCS files which have
been corrupted by non-Y2K-compliant versions of SCCS.

John Interrante <interran@crd.ge.com> added support in cssc.texi for
"make install-info", and several improvements for auxfiles/CSSC.spec.

Marko Rauhamaa <marko@tekelec.com> provided useful bug reports for
SCCS files produced by Sun's Code manager; it produces artifacts in
SCCS files not produced by "ordinary" SCCS.  Examples include lines
of the form "^AU 0" and "^At 0".  (Stop Press: these lines were
produced by (a bug in) Sun's Code Manager).

Achim Hoffann did his best to help me find a bug that was staring me
right in the face.  Many apologies for making him gather all sorts of
information which wasn't in the end necessary.  I'm sorry!

Dick Streefland provided patches for fixing several problems; core
dumps when no SCCS files were specified, and some prototype mismatches.
He also added checks for out-of-space conditions for get and prs.

Greg A. Woods <gwoods@acm.org>, <woods@planix.com>, <woods@weird.com>
provided the "yammer.c" program that allows us to run the test suite
on systems that lack "nl", for example NetBSD/SPARC 1.3.2.  He has
also provided valuable help on keeping multiple versions of Autoconf
happy.  Greg also provided a patch which eliminated the compiler
warnings on sccs.c, after I had given up trying.

Michael Sterrett and Aron Griffis provided several improvements to the
RPM spec file, and some punctuation corrections for cssc.text which
make version 3.12f of makeinfo happy.

William W. Austin provided a bug report regarding SCCS files
containing flag lines which are only four characters long.

Hyman Rosen provided fixes for better compatibility with strange SCCS
files produced by other implementations (e.g. ^Am after ^Ac instead of
before it).

Mark Reynolds provided a fair number of portability improvements (IRIX
6.5, SunOS 4.1.3, Ultrix 4.2).

Sergey Ostashenko provided patches to allow the processing of SCCS
files with gaps in the chain of used sequence numbers, and to allow
two deltas to have the same sequence number, on the condition that one
of them is a removed delta.

Frank van Maarseveen provided a patch for cdc and rmdel: if there is a
problem, delete the lock file even if we are running setuid.

Mark Fortescue provided patches bug-fixes relating to SID selection
and cutoff dates.

Jeff Sheinberg provided a patch to sccs.c, fixing an incorrect
allocation size for a buffer.

Thomas Duffy has taken on the role of building RPM and SRPM packages
for CSSC.

Yann Dirson maintains the Debian package for CSSC.

Ryan Carsten Schmidt contirubuted build fixes for Mac OS.


Local Variables:
mode: Text
End:
