\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename cssc.info
@settitle CSSC: Compatibly Stupid Source Control

@dircategory Miscellaneous
@direntry
* cssc: (cssc).		The GNU work-alike replacement for SCCS.
@end direntry

@finalout
@setchapternewpage odd
@c %**end of header

@set EDITION 1.05
@set VERSION 0.14alpha-pl1
@set UPDATED Thu Apr  4 20:36:38 2002

@c Macros don't work with texi2html!
@c @macro authoraddr
@c @w{@samp{jay@@gnu.org}}
@c @end macro

@ifinfo
This file documents the the GNU @code{cssc} package for working with
@sc{sccs} files.

Copyright (C) 1997,1998,1999,2000,2001,2002 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

@ignore
Permission is granted to process this file through TeX and print the
results, provided the printed document carries copying permission
notice identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph
(this paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual).

@end ignore
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the entire
resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a permission
notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that this permission notice may be stated in a translation approved
by the Foundation.
@end ifinfo

@ifhtml

@html
<H1>CSSC: Compatibly Stupid Source Control</H1>
<H2>Edition @value{EDITION}, for CSSC Version @value{VERSION}</H2>
@value{UPDATED}
@end html

This web page documents the the GNU @code{cssc} package for working with
@sc{sccs} files.

Copyright (C) 1997,1998,1999,2000,2001,2002 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

@ignore
Permission is granted to process this file through TeX and print the
results, provided the printed document carries copying permission
notice identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph
(this paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual).

@end ignore
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the entire
resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a permission
notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that this permission notice may be stated in a translation approved
by the Foundation.
@end ifhtml

@titlepage
@title CSSC
@subtitle Compatibly Stupid Source Control
@subtitle Edition @value{EDITION}, for CSSC Version @value{VERSION}
@subtitle @value{UPDATED}
@author by James Youngman

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 1997,1998,1999,2000,2001,2002 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the entire
resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a permission
notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that this permission notice may be stated in a translation approved
by the Foundation.
@end titlepage

@node Top, Overview, , (dir)

@ifinfo
This file documents the the GNU @code{CSSC} package, which is 
a work-alike for the traditional Unix SCCS suite.

This is edition @value{EDITION}, for CSSC Version @value{VERSION}.

@end ifinfo

@menu
* Overview::		Preliminary information.
* Interface::		How to use the suite.
* Invoking Programs::	How to run the individual CSSC programs.
* Filenames::		Names of files used by CSSC.
* File Format::         Description of the @sc{sccs} file format
* Interoperability::    Interoperating with other versions of @sc{sccs}.
* Environment::         How environment variables affect CSSC.
* Incomplete::		Missing Features.
* Year 2000 Issues::    Status of CSSC with regard to the Millennium.
* Testing::             How to run the test suite and write new cases.
* Problems::		Reporting bugs.
* Copying::		How you can copy and share @code{CSSC}.
* BSD Code::		Parts of the code are from BSD.
* Glossary::	        Definition of some terms relating to CSSC.
* Concept Index::	Index of concepts.
@end menu

@node Overview, Interface, Top, Top
@chapter Overview
@cindex overview

The GNU @sc{cssc} program is designed to be a compatible replacement for
the traditional Unix @sc{sccs} suite.

This documentation is horrendously incomplete since this package is
still under development.

@cindex CVS
While it is strongly suggested that new projects not use this package,
sometimes existing projects require the use of @sc{sccs} files.  While
conversion to other formats is possible, this is also sometimes
impractical.  See the documentation for CVS and RCS.  @xref{What is
CVS?, ,What is CVS?, cvs, The CVS Manual}.  See also the manual pages
for RCS.

GNU CSSC is published under the GNU General Public License, which is
designed to protect your rights, as the user of this program.  You have
the right to modify this program, and distribute it.  You also have
responsibilities to those to whom you distribute copies, as detailed in
the license.  @xref{Copying,,GNU General Public License}.

@cindex Ross Ridge
@cindex Eric Allman
@cindex MySC
@cindex author
@cindex BSD
GNU CSSC was originally based on the public-domain package MySC, which
was written by Ross Ridge.  The enhancement work was done by James
Youngman.

The @code{sccs} program itself and its accompanying documentation
@file{sccs.me} and @file{sccs.1} were written by Eric Allman, and are 
covered by the BSD license (@pxref{BSD Code}).



@node Interface, Invoking Programs, Overview, Top
@chapter How to use the suite
@cindex interface
@cindex Emacs
@cindex VC-mode

By far the easiest way to use @sc{cssc} (or indeed @sc{sccs}) is to use
VC-mode in GNU Emacs.  @xref{Version Systems, ,Version Systems,emacs,The
GNU Emacs manual}.

If you can't   use  VC-mode, the   BSD  command @code{sccs} is a    good
interface to the @sc{sccs} suite (and hence @sc{cssc}).


Other than that, you will need to use each of the programs in the suite
individually.

@node Invoking Programs, Filenames, Interface, Top
@chapter Invoking CSSC programs
@cindex invoking

@ifinfo 
The menu items are arranged in approximate order of 
frequency of use, except @code{admin}, which is first
because you have to use it to start with.
@end ifinfo

@iftex
The commands in the CSSC suite are described in alphabetical order.
Ordered by the frequency with which I use them, they are:-
@code{sccs, get, delta, what, sccsdiff, unget, admin,}
@code{prs, sact, rmdel, cdc, prt, help, val, comb.}
@end iftex

@menu
* admin::         Creating and administering SCCS files.
* sccs::          A more helpful front-end from BSD.
* get::           Checking-out a version for compilation or editing.
* delta::         Checking-in a revised version.
* what::          Identifying versions of files.
* sccsdiff::      Finding the changes between two revisions.
* unget::         When it all goes horribly wrong...
* prs::           Displaying the revision history of a file.
* sact::          Show which SCCS files are being edited.
* rmdel::         Expunging changes or backing out of a check-in.
* cdc::           Changing revision comments after the fact.
* prt::           Printing the delta table of a file.
* comb::          Creating a shell archive of an SCCS file.
* help::          Unimplemented hints on obscure error messages.
* val::           Validating an SCCS file for integrity.
@end menu

@node admin, cdc, , Invoking Programs
@section @code{admin}
@cindex admin
@cindex sccs-admin
@cindex creating @sc{sccs} files
@cindex initialising SCCS history files

To create an @sc{sccs} archive of a source file @file{foo.c}, do
@example
admin -ifoo.c s.foo.c
@end example
This creates the archive file @file{s.foo.c} and initialises it
with the current contents of your source file, @file{foo.c}.  If you use
Emacs as your editor, you can just use @kbd{C-x v i} instead.

Another frequently-used option is @samp{-b}, which indicates that the
file is to be treated as a binary file rather than as text.  You might
want to do this because the file actually contains binary data, or just
characters that have other meanings within an @sc{sccs} file, for
example @samp{^A}, the character whose code is 1.

@table @option
@cindex Restricting access to history files
@cindex Authorisation
@item -a@var{xxx}
Add user or group @var{xxx} to the list of those authorised to check
revisions in (that is, use @code{get -e} and @code{delta}).  Users
must be specified by name and groups by numeric @sc{id}.

This feature is often used in conjunction with a setuid installation of
the @code{sccs} driver program (@pxref{sccs}). This is not a good idea
because the @sc{cssc} suite is not secure (@pxref{Known Problems}).

@item -b
@cindex Binary files
Ensure that the file is encoded as a binary file.  This option only
works in conjunction with the @code{-n} or @code{-i} options.  

This option is not available if binary file support is turned off
(@pxref{Interoperability}) though this can be re-enabled if necessary
with an environment variable (@pxref{Environment}).

@item -dF
Delete flag @var{F} from the flags present in the file (@pxref{Flags}).

@item -e@var{xxx}
Erase the specified user or group from the list of those authorised to
check revisions in or out.  

@item -f@var{F}[@var{xxx}]
Add the flag @var{F} (with optional value @var{xxx}) to the file's 
flags (@pxref{Flags}).  For example, @option{-fv/tmp/checkit} sets the
MR-validation flag to @file{/tmp/checkit}.

@cindex checksum
@item -h
Check the @sc{sccs} file.  The exit value will be 0 if the file is
valid, and not 0 otherwise.

Warning messages may be emitted, indicating things that may or may not
be wrong (e.g. time apparently going backwards), but if no actual errors
are encountered, the exit value will still be zero.  The genuine SCCS
suite invokes @code{val} (@pxref{val}) to perform this validation, but
at the moment, @code{admin} only checks the checksum.

This option is silently incompatible with all the other options; the
specified @sc{sccs} files will not be modified by @code{admin} if the
@option{-h} flag is used.

@item -i@var{foo}
Initialise the @sc{sccs} file with the contents of the file @var{foo}.
If no argument is given, read from standard input.  This implies the
@option{-n} option.

@c XXX: do people actually use this?
@c @item -l@var{rel1},@var{rel2},...
@c Unlock the specified releases.   If @option{a} is specified as the
@c release, that denotes ``all releases''.  Untested.
@c @c TODO: Write the test cases.

@item -m@var{MR-list}
When initialising a file, add the specified list of @sc{mr} numbers
(@pxref{Modification Request Numbers}) to the delta commentary for the
initial version.  This list can be empty.  The specified @sc{mr}s are
validated according to the setting of the @var{v} flag, which should be
set (@pxref{Flags}).  If the @var{v} flag is set but has no value
(i.e. is set to the empty string), validation silently succeeds.  If the
@var{v} flag is not set, the @option{-m} option causes @code{delta} to
fail.

@item -n
Create a new @sc{sccs} file.  Unless @option{-i} is also used, the 
new file will contain control information but the body will be initially
empty.

@item -r@var{N}
@cindex initial release number
Set the initial release number to @var{N}.  The initial level within
that release is always 1.  Some versions of SCCS allow you to specify
actual an actual @sc{sid} here (for example @samp{1.2} or
@samp{1.8.2.1}).  @sc{cssc} also allows this, but emits a warning.  If
you use this option, you must also use the @option{-i} option or the
@option{-n} option.  If the initial @sc{sid} you specify is not on the
trunk, some tools will fail to work with the resulting file.

@item -t@var{desc}
Read in descriptive text for this file from @file{@var{desc}}.  This replaces
any existing description.  If no argument, remove any existing
description (this is illegal if @option{-i} or @option{-n} is used).

@item -V 
Display version information.

@item -y@var{adayada}
When initialising a file, set the comment for that delta to
@var{adayada}.  If the option is given just as @option{-y}, the
comment is recorded as empty.  The following word in the argument list
is not used as the comment.  @emph{Note that this behaviour is different
to most Unix programs, but is the same as the behaviour of traditional
@sc{sccs}}.

@item -z
Fix the checksum information.  The @sc{sccs} file is still validated by
CSSC; apart from possibly having an incorrect checksum, the s-file must
be valid.  If you use this option on an @sc{sccs} file which really is
invalid, then the attempt may fail or @emph{silently write out a valid
but incorrect file}.  Use this option with @emph{extreme} care.
@c TODO: Write the test cases.
@end table


@node Flags, Modification Request Numbers, ,admin
@subsection SCCS file flags
@cindex Flags

Flags are set and cleared with the @code{admin} program.  @xref{admin}.

@unnumberedsubsubsec Boolean Flags 
@table @option
@cindex Making branches
@cindex Branching
@item b
Enable branch deltas: this enables the @option{-b} option of get
(@pxref{get}).
@item e
This flag indicates that the file controlled by this @sc{sccs} file is a
binary file, and hence the body of the @sc{sccs} file is uuencoded.
This flag can only be set with the @option{-b} option of @code{admin} at
the time the file is created (or if admin takes it upon itself to set
this flag automatically), and cannot be unset.  The circumstances under
which this can happen are discussed in @ref{Interoperability}.
@item i
Make @code{get} and @code{delta} exit unsuccessfully when the
@samp{Warning: No id keywords} message is issued.
@cindex Concurrent editing
@cindex Simultaneous editing
@item j
Enables concurrent updates: if you try to get a revision for editing,
this normally fails if another user already has the file locked.
Setting the @samp{j} flag overrides this.
@item n
Create empty releases when the @option{-r} option to @code{get} is used to
skip releases.   These empty releases can later serve as branch points.
@end table

@unnumberedsubsubsec Other Flags 
@table @samp
@item c
Set the release ceiling.  Releases higher than the ceiling cannot be
checked out.
@item f
@cindex obsolete releases
Set the release floor.  Releases lower then the release floor cannot be
checked out.
@item d
Set the default delta which is used when the @code{get} command is given
without the @option{-r} option.   The default behaviour for @code{get} is
defined in @ref{get}.
@item l
Set the locked release list.  These releases cannot be checked out with
@code{get -e}.   The special value @samp{a} denotes all releases.
@item q
Sets the value substituted for the @samp{%Q%} keyword as described in
@ref{Keyword Substitution}.  This flag is referred to in the output of
@sc{sccs} as @samp{csect name}, and is variously referred to here as
that, or the ``user flag'' or the ``Q flag''.
@item m
Sets the overridden value for the @samp{%M%} keyword as described in
@ref{Keyword Substitution}.
@item t
Sets the value for the @samp{%Y%} keyword as described in @ref{Keyword
Substitution}.
@item v
Sets the name of the program used to validate @sc{mr} (modification
request) numbers; @sc{mr}s are described in @ref{Modification Request
Numbers}.  This flag can be set to the empty string, in which case
@sc{mr}s are allowed and the validation silently succeeds without any
program being run.
@end table

@node Modification Request Numbers, , Flags, admin
@subsection Modification Request Numbers
@cindex mr-numbers
@sc{mr}s are identifiers that can be specified when checking in a
revision using @samp{delta} (or even using @samp{admin}, when creating a
file). 

If the @samp{v} (``validate'') flag is set, the user running
@samp{delta} is prompted for @sc{mr} numbers as well as revision
comments.  If this flag is not set, no validation is performed and no
@sc{mr} numbers are prompted for.  If the @option{-m} option is given on
the command line for @option{delta}, the user is not prompted.

@sc{mr} numbers are not required by @sc{cssc} to be actual numbers; they
may contain any non-whitespace printable characters; other
implementations may not be so flexible.

@sc{mr} numbers are frequently used to tie code revisions to other
things, for example engineering change management documents or
bug-tracking databases.  If your change management systems are
computer-based, you can use the validation program to ensure that the
offered @sc{mr} number is valid and that the calling user is allowed to
change the file.  

The first argument passed to the validation program is the name of the
g-file and the following arguments are the @sc{mr} numbers offered.  The
validating program should return zero if all the @sc{mr} numbers are
acceptable.

One might think that it would be useful to associate the @sc{mr} number
with the action of checking out for a modification (@code{get -e}), but
this is not possible with @sc{sccs}.  If you want to do that kind of
thing, you must use a more advanced system, for example GNU CVS.



@node cdc, comb, admin, Invoking Programs
@section @code{cdc}
@cindex cdc
@cindex sccs-cdc
@cindex change delta commentary
@cindex delta comment, changing
@cindex comment, changing
The @code{cdc} command allows you to add comments to the commentary for
a particular delta in an @sc{sccs} file.  Any delta in the file (other
than ones removed with @code{rmdel}) can be modified.

If a comment is not specified on the command line, comments are accepted
via standard input.   

If the special argument name @samp{-} is being used, this means that a
list of files to operate on is being read from standard input, and
therefore the @option{-y} option is mandatory in this case.

The new comments are prepended to the existing comment for that delta,
followed by a line of the form @samp{*** CHANGED *** yy/mm/dd hh:mm:ss
who}.  This is followed by the original comment.   Comments cannot be
removed using @code{cdc}, but they can be added.

Only three options are supported:-

@table @option
@item -m@var{MR-list}
The specified (space-separated) list of @sc{mr}s is added to the
@sc{mr}-list for the relevant delta.  If more than one @sc{mr} number is
to be added, the whole option should be quoted, to protect the spaces.
If an @sc{mr} is prefixed with an exclamation mark (@samp{!}), then the
indicated delta is removed from the existing list of @sc{mr}s for the
delta.  The file comment is modified to indicate what @sc{mr}s have been
removed.  If an @sc{mr} to be removed is in fact not present in any
case, this is silently ignored. and the comment is not updated for that
@sc{mr}.  If you do not also want to add to the comment for the delta,
specify an empty comment option (that, is, a bare @option{-y}).

@item -r@var{SID}
This indicates which delta is to be changed.   It must refer to an
existing delta in the file, which has not been removed with
@code{rmdel}.

@item -y@var{Comment}
This option introduces a comment to be added to the commentary for the
specified @sc{sid}.  If more than one line is needed, it is a good idea
to enclose the option in quotation marks to ensure that the shell
includes them in the argument passed to @code{cdc}.  An empty @option{-y}
option can be used to indicate that the commentary for this delta is not
to be modified (this is only useful when the @option{-m} option is used).
If the @option{-y} option is not given, the user is prompted for comments.

@end table 


@node comb, delta, cdc, Invoking Programs
@section @code{comb}
@cindex comb
@cindex sccs-comb
This program is not yet implemented or documented in the manual, there
are no tests for it in the test suite yet, but it is part of @sc{sccs}
so it will eventually be implemented. 
@c sorry!
@c TODO: write the code, write the test cases, and document it.


@node delta, get, comb, Invoking Programs
@section @code{delta}
@cindex delta
@cindex checking in changes
@cindex changes, checking in
@cindex committing changes
@cindex sccs-delta
@cindex checking in new revisions
The @code{delta} command is used to add a new revision to the ones
already stored in an @sc{sccs} file.  Before being able to do this you
need to run @kbd{get -e} to check the file out for editing.

@cindex SID
@cindex release
@cindex level
@cindex branch
@cindex sequence
A new revision is created by the @code{delta} program.  These revisions
are each identified by a unique @dfn{SID}.  A @sc{sid} looks like
@samp{1.2.3.4}, where the four numbers are the @dfn{release},
@dfn{level}, @dfn{branch} and @dfn{sequence} numbers.

New revisions on the main sequence (the @dfn{trunk}) have no branch or
sequence numbers and so just have two number components (@samp{1.2}, for
example).

When a new version is checked in, @code{delta} usually prompts for
comments describing the changes just made.  At this point you can enter
any comments, separating lines with backslash-newline pairs.  An
unescaped newline terminates the comment, allowing operation to
continue.

Sometimes, running @code{delta} results in the creation of a branch in
the @sc{sccs} file; this is controlled by the @code{get} command at the
time the file is checked out for editing (@pxref{branches}).

The @code{delta} program checks to see if you are authorised to check
in a delta to this file.  The list of authorised users can be
maintained with the @code{admin} program (@pxref{admin}).  If the
MR-validation flag (@pxref{Flags}) is set, you must also supply a
valid MR-number in order to be able to check in your change.

@menu
* Basic Usage: delta usage.         Frequently-used @code{delta} commands
* Options: delta options.           Full list of options
@end menu

@node delta usage, delta options, , delta
@subsection Basic usage for @code{delta}

Although there are several valid command-line options for @code{delta},
they are not frequently used; the most common usage of delta is 

@example
delta SCCS/s.umsp.c
@end example

@noindent
and this command simply applies the changes to the file @file{umsp.c} to
the @sc{sccs} file which tracks it.   Though it is possible to specify
the comment and MR-number for this change using command-line options,
it's more common to type them when prompted, unless @code{delta} is
being driven by another program; either way, it's unusual to specify
options for @code{delta} on the command line.

Note that the filename you specify on the command line is that of the
@sc{sccs} file, not the filename of the working file.  The BSD wrapper
program, sccs(1), will guess the correct filename for you, but this
doesn't happen unless you do actually invoke it (@code{sccs delta
umsp.c} for example).

@node delta options, , delta usage, delta
@subsection Options for @code{delta}

@table @option
@item -g@var{sid-List}
The specified list of deltas are to be ignored when the version
being checked in is retrieved using @code{get}.  The list is a list of
@sc{sid}s separated by commas, or can contain ranges of @sc{sid}s (these
are indicated by a dash).  Untested.
@c TODO: Write the test cases.

@item -m@var{mr-list}
Specify the indicated list of @sc{mr} numbers (separated by spaces) for
this change (@pxref{Modification Request Numbers}).  If the @var{v} flag
(@pxref{Flags}) is set, @code{delta} will prompt for MR numbers if none
are given on the command line.  If the @var{v} flag has a non-empty
value, as opposed to just being set, then the supplied list of MR
numbers will be verified using that program.  The requested delta will
not be made if this validation fails (the validation program returns a
nonzero exit status).

When the @var{v} flag is set, deltas @emph{must} be checked in using
this flag.  If you are using Emacs's vc-mode, you can do this by setting
the variable @var{vc-checkin-flags} to @code{"-m2677"} if the @sc{mr}
with which you are working is numbered 2677, for example.

@item -n
If this option is given, the edited file is not deleted once processing
has succeeded.  The edited file is referred to as the ``g-file'', since
it is the file which was previously ``gotten'' by the @code{get}
command.

@item -p
Display the differences between the old and new versions of the file
during processing.  The output of @code{diff} is echoed on the standard
output.
Untested.
@c TODO: Write the test cases.

@item -r
If several versions are checked out, the @option{-r} command-line option is
used to specify which checked-out version this change is in reference
to.  When @code{get} is used to check out a version for editing, it
announces two @sc{sid}s:-

@example
3.1
new delta 3.2
402 lines
@end example
@noindent

One identifies the version forming the basis of the change, and the
other specifies the @sc{sid} that the new version will be assigned once
it is checked in again.  Either of these two @sc{sid}s (in this case,
3.1 or 3.2) can be used for the @option{-r} option of @code{delta}.
Untested.
@c TODO: Write the test cases.

@item -s
Suppress warning or confirmation messages.  Error messages go to
standard error.  Untested.
@c TODO: Write the test cases.

@item -y
Specify a comment for the revision log.  This option is usually quoted
to protect the spaces contained in it.  An empty comment can be
specified by just using a naked @option{-y}.  If this option is not given
on the command line, @code{delta} will prompt the user for a comment.
@end table


@node get, help, delta, Invoking Programs
@section @code{get}
@cindex get
@cindex sccs-get
@cindex checking-out previous revisions
@cindex retrieving previous revisions
@cindex locking revisions for update
@cindex new versions
The @code{get} command is to retrieve previous revisions from an
@sc{sccs} file.  With the @option{-e} option, it also locks the gotten
revision so that a modified version can be checked in later using
@code{delta}.


@menu
* Basic Usage: get usage.           Frequently-used @code{get} commands
* Options: get options.             Full list of options.
* Branches: branches.               How branches are made.  
* Keywords: Keyword Substitution.   Keyword Substitution
@end menu

@node get usage, get options, , get
@subsection Basic Usage for @code{get}
@table @option
There are very few common basic usage patterns for @code{get}.  Below,
@file{s.foo.c} denotes the name of any existing @sc{sccs} file.

@item get s.foo.c
Get a copy of the most recent trunk revision of @file{s.foo.c} into the
file @file{foo.c}.

@item get -Gbar s.foo.c
@cindex g-file
Get a version from @file{s.foo.c}, into @file{bar} rather than the
default @file{foo.c}.  The file produced by @code{get} is often referred
to as the ``g-file''.

@item get -r1.3 s.foo.c
Get revision 1.3 from @file{s.foo.c} into @file{foo.c}.  The @option{-G}
option can be used to set the name of the gotten file.

@item get -p s.foo.c
Get the most recent trunk revision, and print it on standard output.
The @option{-r} option could also be used to specify some other revision.
@end table

Unless you specify the @option{-k} or @option{-e} option, the retrieved file
will be created read-only.


@node get options, branches, get usage, get
@subsection Options for @code{get}
@table @option
Full description of options
@item -a@i{N}
Retrieve the version corresponding to the delta sequence number
@i{N}.  Mainly for use by other programs in the suite.


@item -b
Create a new branch when the resulting file is checked back in.  Used
with the @option{-e} option.  If the @option{-e} option is not given, or if
the @option{b} (branch) flag is not set in the @sc{sccs} file, this option
has no effect; a branch is not made.  If the version to be checked out
for editing has a successor, a branch is created whether or not the
@option{-b} flag is present (@pxref{branches,branches,Making Branches}).

@item -c@i{when}
@cindex time travel
@cindex Year 2000
Get the version that was current at the time specified by @i{when}.  The
format of the argument is [cc]yy[mm[dd[hh[mm[ss]]]]].  Any fields
omitted (except ``cc'') assume their maximum possible values so that if
you specify @option{-c92}, you get the latest version which was available
in the year 1992.  It is possible to give four digits for the year as a
@sc{cssc}-specific extension, but only if none of the other fields are
omitted.  If only two digits are used and the resulting value is less
than 69, the year is assumed to be in the twenty-first century
(@pxref{prs options} and @ref{Year 2000 Issues}).


@item -D
Turns on debugging output, indicating what is going on as the @sc{sccs}
file is read.  This option may go away or have its behaviour change in
the near future.

@item -e
@cindex p-file
Indicates that the retrieved version is for editing.  When checked
back in the resulting file will have a new revision number.  The
retrieved file is writable, and keyword substitution does not take
place.  A @dfn{p-file} is created; this file contains information
about what versions of the s-file are being edited, and by whom.
Unless the @samp{j} flag is set (@pxref{Flags}), @code{get -e} will
fail if someone else already has the file locked.  If the list of
authorised users in the @sc{sccs} file is not empty, you must be in
that list in order to use this option.


@item -g
Do a dry-run, showing what version would be retrieved, but don't
actually get the file.  This is sometimes done by scripts, just to test
the exit status.

@item -G@var{foo}
Name the gotten file @file{@var{foo}}, instead of the default name.

@item -i@var{list}
Include the deltas for the listed @sc{sid}s.  See also @option{-x}.

@item -k
Avoid doing keyword substitution (@pxref{Keyword Substitution}).  This
is assumed when @option{-e} is specified.  The gotten file is writable.


@item -l
Unsupported.
@c TODO: Write the test cases, and document it.

@item -lp
Unsupported.
@c TODO: Write the test cases, and document it.

@item -m
Prepend to each line of the result the @sc{sid} corresponding to the
@code{delta} which introduced this line to the file.

@item -n
Precede each line of output with the module name, before any @sc{sid}
added with the @option{-m} option.

@item -p
Write the result to the standard output, rather than to a file.  

@item -r@var{X}
Retrieve version @var{X}, rather than the default.

@item -s
Run silently.

@item -t
Get the ``top'' delta for the indicated release.  The default behaviour
of @code{get} is to get the highest revision on the trunk.  The
@option{-t} option only modifies this behaviour in the situation where the
topmost trunk revision is a branch point.  In this case, the @option{-t}
option causes the topmost revision on this branch to be retrieved.  In
other words, the @option{-t} option removes the restriction that the
retrieved version should be on the trunk.  This option is used by
@code{comb} (@pxref{comb}) and by the driver program @code{sccs} from
BSD (@pxref{sccs}).

@item -V
Show version information.

@item -w@var{XXX}
When performing keyword substitution (@pxref{Keyword Substitution}), use
@var{XXX} rather than @samp{%Z%%M% <@sc{tab}> %I%} as the substitution
value for %W%.

@item -x@var{list}
Exclude the indicated deltas from the result.  Deltas are indicated by
specifying the @sc{sid} at which they arrived in the file.

@end table


@node branches, Keyword Substitution, get options, get
@subsection Making Branches
@cindex branches
@cindex forking
@cindex modifying released code
@cindex bug-fixing released code
Normally, editing revision 1.1 of a file produces revision 1.2.  Editing
that produces revision 1.3, and so on.   Sometimes, however, we need to
make a change to an earlier version which has already been superseded.

This might happen, for example, when a bug has been reported in a
released version of a file; a rapid bug-fix is required, but you're in
the middle of working towards a new release.   A viable strategy is to
make a branch at the previously-released version, modify that to fix the
bug (and release this bug-fix).  Meanwhile, development can be continued
along the ``main trunk'', and the same bug-fix can be incorporated in
this, ready for the next release later on.

When you check out a version of a file for editing, @sc{cssc} tells you
what the @sc{sid} of the new version will be.  For normal progress along
the trunk, the @dfn{level number} is incremented.  This is the second
numeric element of the @sc{sid}.  In general, a @sc{sid} is composed of
four numbers @samp{R.L.B.S}, where ``R'' stands for ``Release'', ``L''
stands for ``Level'', ``B'' stands for ``Branch'', and ``S'' stands for
``Sequence number'' (not the same as the sequence numbers produced in
the output of @code{prt}).

Trunk revisions have only two components; you can think of the branch
and sequence numbers as being zero.  Non-trunk revisions have four
components.  When a branch is created from an existing @sc{sid}, the
release and level numbers are copied, the branch number is set to the
lowest unused value for that release and level, and the sequence number
is set to one.  Hence the first branch from version 1.1 will be version
1.1.1.1, and if a branch is made from that, its @sc{sid} will be
1.1.2.1.

Branches are made from any given version when that version already has a
successor (for example, a @code{get -e} on version 1.1 will result in a
branch (1.1.1.1) if version 1.2 exists, and a @code{get -e} on version
1.2.1.1 will result in a branch (1.2.2.1) if version 1.2.1.2 exists.

If the ``enable branches'' flag is set, it is also possible to make
branches for revisions that do not have successors.  This is done with
the @option{-b} flag of @code{get}.



@node Keyword Substitution, , branches, get
@subsection Keyword Substitution
@cindex Keyword Substitution
@cindex Version identifiers
Keyword substitution is performed unless the @option{-k} option or the
@option{-e} option is given to @code{get}.

@ref{what} contains a keyword substitution example.

The keywords are all of the form @samp{%@i{x}%} where @i{x} stands for
an upper-case letter, one of:

@table @asis

@item A
Expands to the same as @samp{%Z% %Y% %M% %I% %Z%}.
@item B
The branch number of the gotten version
@item C
Current line in the output file
@item D
@cindex Year 2000
The date at the time the file was gotten, in the form @i{yy/mm/dd}.  The
year is always represented as two digits but this is not ambiguous since
the two-digit year is no later than 2068 (@pxref{Year 2000 Issues}).
@item E
@cindex Year 2000
The date that the newest delta in the gotten file was applied,
@i{yy/mm/dd}.  The year is always represented as two digits but this is
not ambiguous since the two-digit year is no later than 2068
(@pxref{Year 2000 Issues}).
@item F
Name of the @sc{sccs} file, for example @samp{s.foo.c}.
@item G
@cindex Year 2000
As for %E%, but in the US format @i{mm/dd/yy}.  

@item H
@cindex Year 2000
As for %D%, but in the US format @i{mm/dd/yy}.

@item I
Expands to the same as %R%.%L%.%B%.%S%, that is, the @sc{sid} of the
retrieved version.
@item L
The level number of the retrieved version.
@item M
Module name: the value of the @code{m} (module) flag, or the base name
of the @sc{sccs} file with the @file{s.} removed if the module flag is
unset.
@item P
Full name of the @sc{sccs} file.
@item Q
Value of the @code{q} flag.  The @code{q} flag has no other purpose, and
can be set with @samp{admin -fq@r{foo}}.   @xref{Flags}.
@item R
Release number of the retrieved version.
@item S
Sequence number of the retrieved version.
@item T
Current time (@i{hh:mm:ss}) when the file was retrieved, see %D% and %H%.
@item W
Expands to %Z% %M% <@sc{tab}> %I% or the argument for the @option{-w}
flag, if given.
@item Y
Value of the @code{t} (module type) flag.
@item Z
The literal string @code{@@(#)}.  @xref{what}.
@end table

@node help, prs, get, Invoking Programs
@section @code{help}
@cindex help program
@cindex sccs-help
This module is not implemented, and it probably will never be, because
it exists to translate the sometimes obscure error messages produced by
(genuine) @sc{sccs}.  These messages come with identifying codes (like
``(ge4)''); one might type @kbd{help ge4} to translate an obscure
message into a more readable message detailing what has gone wrong.  The
problem with this approach is that it results in a program called
@code{help} on the user's path.  When a naive user types @kbd{help} they
are probably not looking for an explanation of an obscure message from
@sc{sccs}.  In fact, @code{help} is in any case a shell builtin for GNU
Bash.  Explanations of any obscure or unusual error messages belong in
this manual, and so no @code{sccs-help} program is provided or planned.



@node prs, prt, help, Invoking Programs
@section @code{prs}
@cindex prs
@cindex sccs-prs
@cindex revision summary
@cindex Summary of @sc{sccs} file
@cindex Dumping @sc{sccs} files
@cindex Whodunit
@cindex Audit trailing
The @code{prs} command (mnemonic: ``print revision summary'') prints
information about an @sc{sccs} file in a user-defined format.  There are
options for selecting which deltas are reported on; selection is
possible by check-in time or by @sc{sid}.  The format of the output can
also be specified on the command line.  All parts of an @sc{sccs} file
can be dumped with @code{prs}.  Those parts which appear once per delta
can be uniquely identified by @sc{sid} or by time.

Typical uses for @code{prs} are 

@itemize @bullet

@item 
Producing an audit trail of who changed what, and why, for example for 
a software release report, or for ISO 9000 documentation.

@item 
Discovering how a particular piece of code became broken, and deducing
which change broke it.  The @code{get -m} command is also useful for
this, see @ref{get options,Options for @code{get},Options for
@code{get}}.

@item 
Listing all changes made on Friday afternoons, as a preparation for
extra checking.
@end itemize


@menu
* Basic Usage: prs usage.           Frequently-used @code{prs} commands
* Options: prs options.             Full list of options
* Keywords: Data Keywords.          Data Keyword Substitution
@end menu


@node prs usage, prs options, , prs
@subsection Basic Usage for @code{prs}

Here are some examples of the use of prs, with explanations of what they
do.

@table @samp
@item prs s.myfile.c
Show information about all the versions of @file{myfile.c}.

@item prs SCCS
Show information about all the @sc{sccs} files in the directory
@file{SCCS}.

@item prs -e -d:P: s.main.c | sort -u
Show which users have made changes to main.c.

@item prs -l -c`date +%y%m%d --date "last week"` SCCS
Examine all the @sc{sccs} files in the directory @file{SCCS}. Show any deltas
that have been created since last week.
@end table


@node prs options, Data Keywords, prs usage, prs
@subsection Options for @code{prs}

@table @option
@item -a 
Include even removed deltas in the output.  Removed deltas have a type
"R", as output by the :DT: keyword.

@item -c@var{[cc]YYMMDDHHMMSS}
@cindex Year 2000
Specifies the time of the ``cutoff''.  When this option is given, the
delta selected by @code{prs} is the last one checked in before the
cutoff.  As usual, any fields left unspecified in the cutoff are given
the maximum legal value (for example, the seconds field defaults to 59).
The fields can be separated by any non-numeric character, for example
@samp{-c97/11/02-11:25:42}.

As an extension specific to @sc{cssc}, if the argument contains more
than twelve (12) digits, and the first four characters are all digits,
it is assumed that a four-digit year form has been used.  This means
that you can say @samp{-c1997/11/02-11:25:42} to mean the same as the
above.

In line with the X/Open CAE Specification, Commands and Utilities
(version 2, September 1994, pages 588 and 361), if the century field is
@emph{not} given and the year is less than 69, it is assumed to be a
year in the twenty-first century.  The X/Open document does not mandate
a four-digit year specifier, but it would not make sense to apply this
rule if a four-digit year is specified.  @xref{Year 2000 Issues}.



This behaviour is usually not the one required, and hence the @option{-e}
or @option{-l} options are specified too.

@item -d@var{format}
This specifies the data format for the output.  Because the default
output format is sensible, this is typically used either in a shell
script which will process the output further, or by a human to retrieve
information which is not shown by default.  See @ref{Data Keywords} for
the various keywords that can be used.  Any characters in the data
format which are not part of a keyword are output as well.

If one specifies the @option{-d} option, @code{prs} by default only gives
information about the latest delta.  To restore the default behavior of
showing all the deltas, use the @option{-e} option as well.

@item -e
Makes the @option{-c} option select deltas created at or earlier than the
specified time.  Makes the @option{-r} option select deltas before and
including the one specified by the indicated @sc{sid}.  

@item -l
As the @option{-e} option, but select only later deltas rather than
earlier ones.


@item -r@var{SID}
Specifies the @sc{sid} for which information is provided.  If blank, the
latest delta is selected.

@end table

@node Data Keywords, , prs options, prs
@subsection Data Keywords for the @option{-d} option of @code{prs}


@subsubsection Global Keywords

These keywords expand to the same thing, no matter which version is
being examined.  Many of these are @sc{sccs} file flags (@pxref{Flags}).

@table @code
@item :BD: 
Emits the body of the @sc{sccs} file, that is, the part containing all
the delta information.  Note that since this is dumped verbatim, it
contains control characters.  If you want a more readable format,
consider using the @option{-b} option of @code{prt} (@pxref{prt
options}). 

@item :BF: 
Indicates the setting (@samp{yes} or @samp{no}) of the branch flag.

@item :CB:
Indicates the value of the release number ceiling flag.

@item :Ds:
The default @sc{sid} to check out (See @ref{Flags} and @ref{get}).

@item :F:
Name of the @sc{sccs} file.

@item :FB:
Indicates the value of the release floor boundary flag.

@item :FD:
File descriptive text (@pxref{admin}).

@item :FL:
List of @sc{sccs} file flags.

@item :J:
Value (@samp{yes} or @samp{no}) of the joint-edit flag.       

@item :KF:
Value (@samp{yes} or @samp{no}) of the keyword-warning flag (@pxref{admin}). 

@item :LK:
Value of the locked-releases flag.

@item :M:
The module name (the value of the @samp{m} flag).

@item :MF:
The value (@samp{yes} or @samp{no}) of the @sc{mr} validation flag
(@pxref{delta}).

@item :MP:
The value of the @sc{mr} validation program flag (@pxref{delta}).  This
is usually the name of an executable file.

@item :ND:
The value of the null-delta (@samp{n}) flag (@samp{yes} or @samp{no}).

@item :Q:
The value of the (user-defined) Q flag (arbitrary one-line text).

@item :PN:
The full path name of the @sc{sccs} file.       

@item :UN:
List of users authorised to make deltas to this file (one per line).
This list can be modified with the use of the options @option{-a} and
@option{-e} of @code{admin}; if this list is empty, any user is
allowed to use @code{delta} on this file (subject to the usual file
permissions checks made by the operating system).  However, in this
case the @samp{UN} data keyword somewhat curiously expands to
@samp{none}.

@item :Y:
Value of the module-type flag.
@end table


The @samp{:BD:}, @samp{:FD:}, @samp{:FL:} and @samp{:UN:} keywords from
this section may expand to strings containing newlines.


@subsubsection Version-specific Keywords

These keywords expand to data that is specific to a particular version.


@table @code
@item :A:   
Expands to @samp{:Z::Y: :M: :I::Z:}, useful for @code{what}.
@item :B:   
Branch number of @sc{sid}

@item :C: 
Comments for this delta.  These may extend over several lines.

@item :D:
@cindex Year 2000 
Date (yy/mm/dd) that this version was checked in.  Expands to
@samp{:Dy:/:Dm:/:Dd:}. The year is always represented as two digits but
is not ambiguous since the two-digit year is no later than 2068 
(@pxref{Year 2000 Issues}).

@item :Dd:
Day-of-month on which the delta was checked in (two digits).

@item :Dg:    
Sequence numbers of ignored deltas (separated by white space).

@item :DI:    
Expands to @samp{:Dn:/:Dx:/:Dg:} (sequence numbers
included/excluded/ignored).

@item :DL:      
Expands to @samp{:Li:/:Ld:/:Lu:} (lines inserted/deleted/unchanged).
 
@item :Dm:      
Month when this version as checked in (two digits).

@item :Dn:      
Sequence numbers of included deltas (separated by white space).

@item :DP:      
Sequence number of the delta that precedes this one.

@item :DS:
Sequence number of this delta.

@item :Dt:
Expands to @samp{:DT: :I: :D: :T: :P: :DS: :DP:}. 

@item :DT:      
Delta type: @samp{R} (removed) or @samp{D} (normal).

@item :Dx:      
Sequence numbers of excluded deltas (separated by white space).

@cindex Year 2000
@item :Dy:  
Year when this version was checked in.  The year is always represented
as two digits but is not ambiguous since the two-digit year is no later
than 2068 (@pxref{Year 2000 Issues}).

@item :GB:
The body for this version, as distinct from the 
body of the @sc{sccs} file itself, which is obtained
with @samp{:BD:}.  Keyword expansion will be performed 
in the same way as if @code{get} had been used.


@item :I:
The @sc{sid} of this version.

@item :L:
The level component of the @sc{sid} (that is, the second number).

@item :Ld:
Number of lines deleted in this version, with respect to its predecessor.

@item :Li:
Number of lines inserted in this version, with respect to its predecessor.

@item :Lu:
Number of lines unchanged in this version, with respect to its predecessor.

@item :MR:
The MR numbers specified when this delta was created.

@item :P:
Perpetrator: the login name of the user who created this delta.

@item :R:
The release number of the @sc{sid} (the first number).

@item :S:
The sequence number of the @sc{sid}.  Don't confuse this with the delta
sequence numbers (@pxref{Delta Table}), which are internal identifiers
for deltas which are output by the keywords :DI:, :Dn:, :Dx: and :Dg:.

@item :T:       
Time that this version was checked in (@samp{:Th:::Tm:::Ts:}).

@item :Th:
Hours component of check-in time (@samp{:T:}).

@item :Tm:
Minutes  component of check-in time (@samp{:T:}).

@item :Ts:
Seconds  component of check-in time (@samp{:T:}).

@item :W:
Shorthand for @samp{:Z::M:<@sc{tab}>:I:}, suitable for @code{what}
(@pxref{what}).

@item :Z:       
Expands to @samp{@@(#)} (@pxref{what}).
@end table

The @samp{:C:}, @samp{:GB:} and @samp{:MR:} keywords from this section
may expand to strings containing newlines.



@node prt, rmdel, prs, Invoking Programs
@section @code{prt}
@cindex prt
@cindex sccs-prt
@cindex Revision summary
@cindex Change summary
@cindex Modification summary
@cindex Summary of changes to a history file
The @code{prt} command provides information about an @sc{sccs} file
without modifying it.  There are many options, though the default
behaviour is usually appropriate.  It is possible to select what
revisions to print information on, by @sc{sid} or by date.

Some @sc{sccs} implementations lack the @code{prt} command, though
none lack the @code{prs} command (@pxref{prs}) which is otherwise
quite similar.

@menu
* Basic usage: prt usage.       Frequently-used @code{prt} commands
* Options:     prt options.     Full list of options
* Output format: prt output.    The format of @code{prt}'s output
@end menu

@node prt usage, prt options, , prt
@subsection Basic usage for @code{prt}

The output provided by @code{prt} when no options are given is
sufficient most of the time, and so it's common to use it without any
options:-

@example
prt s.umsp.c
@end example

@noindent
If you require more detail, the @option{-e} (``everything'') option
produces more detail:-

@example
prt -e s.umsp.c
@end example

@noindent
As usual, any argument that is the name of a directory causes all
@sc{sccs} files in that directory to be processed; the special argument
@file{-} indicates that a list of SCCS files are to be read from
@code{prt}'s standard input.



@node prt options, prt output, prt usage, prt
@subsection Options for @code{prt}

@table @option
@item -a
``All deltas''; this means that the output will include ``removed''
deltas.  Removed deltas exist after @code{rmdel} has been used to remove
a delta.

@item -b
Print the body of the @sc{sccs} file.  This is printed in a readable
format.  The control character @samp{^A} (Control-A, ASCII code 1) which
starts some lines of an @sc{sccs} file is printed as three asterisks,
@samp{***}.  Lines that do not start with the control character are
indented by one tab stop.  For encoded (binary) files, the encoded form
of the file data is printed (this is what actually appears in the
@sc{sccs} file itself).  If you want to extract the actual body of the
@sc{sccs} file, use the @samp{:BD:} keyword of @code{prs} (@pxref{Data
Keywords}.

@item -d
Print information about the deltas in the file, as opposed to
information about the @sc{sccs} file itself (for example the authorised
users).  This is the default behaviour.  The default behaviour is turned
off by the @option{-b}, @option{-f}, @option{-t} and @option{-u} flags, but
specifying @option{-d} on the command line again will ensure that the
delta information is printed.

@item -e
``Everything''; Means the same as @samp{-i -u -f -t -d}.

@item -c@var{[cc]YYMMDDHHMMSS}
@cindex Year 2000
Specifies the time of the ``cutoff''.  When this option is given,
@code{prt} stops printing delta information when it reaches a @sc{sid}
at least as old as the cutoff.  As usual, any fields left unspecified in
the cutoff are given the maximum legal value (for example, the seconds
field defaults to 59).  The fields can be separated by any non-numeric
character, for example @samp{-c97/11/02-11:25:42}.

As an extension specific to @sc{cssc}, if the argument contains more
than twelve (12) digits, and the first four characters are all digits,
it is assumed that a four-digit year form has been used.  This means
that you can say @samp{-c1997/11/02-11:25:42} to mean the same as the
above.

In line with the X/Open CAE Specification, Commands and Utilities
(version 2, September 1994, pages 588 and 361), if the century field is
@emph{not} given and the year is less than 69, it is assumed to be a
year in the twenty-first century.  The X/Open document does not mandate
a four-digit year specifier, but it would not make sense to apply this
rule if a four-digit year is specified.  @xref{Year 2000 Issues}.

The @option{-c} and @option{-r} options are mutually exclusive.

@item -f
Print the flags of the @sc{sccs} file (@pxref{Flags}).

@item -i
Print the serial numbers of included, excluded, and ignored deltas.

@item -r@var{[cc]YYMMDDHHMMSS}
Specifies a cutoff, as with the @option{-c} option, but with the opposite
sense; that is, nothing is printed for deltas that are more recent than
the indicated time.

The @option{-c} and @option{-r} options are mutually exclusive.

@item -s
Print only a summary line for each delta (that is, the @sc{mr} list and
comments and so on are omitted).

@item -t
Print the text description of the @sc{sccs} file, as set by @code{admin
-t} (@pxref{admin}).

@item -u
Print the list of users and group IDs authorised to make deltas, one per
line.

@item -y@var{SID}
Print only information for deltas as new as the specified @sc{sid}.  If
the argument part is empty, that is, the option used is simply
@option{-y}, the most recent delta is selected.   The oder in which delta
information is stored within the @sc{sccs} file is such that the
@sc{sid} selected by this option will be the last one printed.

If the @option{-y} option is used in conjunction with either the @option{-c}
or the @sc{-y} option, processing stops when either condition (date or
@sc{sid} match) is satisfied.

@end table


@node prt output, , prt options, prt
@subsection @code{prt} output format

The output format is fixed, though parts of the output can be omitted.

@enumerate 
@item The header 

  @itemize @bullet
  @item Newline
  @item @sc{sccs} file name, followed by a colon
  @item Two further newlines.
  @end itemize

@item 
  Delta table information (for @option{-d}, @option{-e}, also the default,
  but not if @option{-b}, @option{-f}, @option{-t}, @option{-u} are specified).
  This section is printed once for each selected delta.

  This begins with a newline as a separator (except when a cutoff is
  being used, in which case the @sc{sccs} file name is used, followed by
  a colon and a TAB character).

  @itemize @bullet
  @item Delta type @*
        'R' for removed deltas (@pxref{rmdel}), and 'D' for ordinary ones.
  
  @item TAB

  @item Delta creation time (YY/MM/DD hh:mm:ss)

  @item The login name of the user who created this delta

  @item Sequence number of this delta

  @item Sequence number of the previous delta

  @item Line statistics @samp{inserted/deleted/unchanged}.  These
  statistics are capped at 99999, due to a limitation in the file
  format.

  @item Newline 

  @end itemize

@item Delta detail information @*
  This section is printed once for each selected delta, unless the
  @option{-s} option has been specified.

  @itemize @bullet
    
  @item Included deltas  
  @item Excluded deltas  
  @item Ignored deltas  

  @item @sc{mr} numbers 
  @item Delta comments

  @end itemize


@item Global information @*
Once information has been printed for each of the selected deltas, the
global information is printed.   This consists of 

  @itemize @bullet
  @item List of authorised users and group IDs (if the list is blank,
        @samp{everyone} is printed)
  @item The @sc{sccs} file flags (@pxref{Flags}) are printed.
  @item The description of the @sc{sccs} file is printed (this 
        is the description set by the @option{-t} option of @code{admin}).  
  @item The body of the @sc{sccs} file is printed, in a readable format.
        The control character @samp{^A} that begins some lines is
        printed as @samp{*** }, and other lines are printed indented 
        by one tab stop.  Other than that, the body is printed as found 
        in the @sc{sccs} file.  This means that binary files are left
        encoded.


  @end itemize

@end enumerate


@node rmdel, sact, prt, Invoking Programs
@section @code{rmdel}
@cindex rmdel
@cindex sccs-rmdel
@cindex backing out of changes
@cindex censoring revisions
@cindex deleting revisions
@cindex undoing revisions
@cindex Oops, it didn't compile
The @code{rmdel} (``Remove Delta'') command allows the last version last
checked in to an @sc{sccs} file to be removed again.  Typically, one
does this after realizing that newly checked in version doesn't compile,
or doesn't work, and the fix is simple.  In the author's opinion, it's
almost always better to be honest about mistakes, and just make a new
delta for the fixed version.

The @sc{sid} of a removed delta is soon re-used by @code{delta}, usually
for the fixed version.

The @code{rmdel} command takes only one option, @option{-r}, which
specifies the @sc{sid} of the version to be removed.  This option is
mandatory.

The @code{rmdel} command will fail if you hadn't checked in that
revision, or if it is in use in some way.  For example, @code{rmdel}
fails if the specified @sc{sid} is not the latest revision on its
branch, or if it has been checked out for editing.

As usual, any number of @sc{sccs} files can be named on the command
line.  The special argument @file{-} indicates that the list of files to
be operated on should be read from standard input.  If an argument is a
directory, the @sc{rmdel} command is applied to all @sc{sccs} files in
that directory.

@node sact, sccs, rmdel, Invoking Programs
@section @code{sact}
@cindex sact
@cindex sccs-sact
@cindex Activity summary
The @code{sact} (``Show Editing Activity'') command provides
a summary of which files are currently checked out for editing. 
For each checked-out file, a summary line is given.  This line  is of
the form @samp{old-SID new-SID user date time}.  

@table @samp
@item old-SID 
Identifies the revision that was checked out for editing.

@item new-SID
This is the @sc{sid} that will be allocated by @code{delta} when the
working file is checked in again.

@item user
The login name of the user who checked out the file.

@item date time
The date and time at which the checking-out was done.
@end table

No output is produced for @sc{sccs} files that are not currently locked
for editing.  If a directory is specified on the command line, the whole
directory is examined.  Directory hierarchies are not descended beyond
this one level.  If @samp{-} is given as an argument, filenames are read
from standard input.

Note that times in @sc{sccs} files (and lock-files) are stored as local
time, so if you are collaborating with developers in another time zone,
the date shown will be in their local time for files that they are
editing.

@c TODO: Write the test cases.


@node sccs, sccsdiff, sact, Invoking Programs
@section @code{sccs}
@cindex sccs
@cindex front-end tools
@cindex Cuddlier interface
The @code{sccs} utility is available with @code{CSSC}.  The code has
been adapted to support GNU Autoconf, but it should function in the same
way.  The only difference between the operation of the original BSD
@code{sccs} program and that of the one provided by @code{CSSC} is that
way that the called programs are searched for.  While the original
program has the paths hard-coded in as @file{/usr/sccs/*}, the version
accompanying @code{CSSC} first searches for them on the PATH, and then
falls back on @file{/usr/sccs/*}.  If the executable is running
set-user-id, the @code{PATH} environment variable is ignored.  The
@code{sccs} program itself should be fairly secure, but the other
programs in the suite are not.  @xref{Known Problems}, for more
information.

The @code{sccs} program is documented in its online manual page, and
also in @cite{An Introduction to the Source Code Control System} by Eric
Allman, a copy of which is included with this suite.

Unlike all the other parts of the suite, the @code{sccs} program and its
accompanying documentation are covered by the BSD copyright license; see
@ref{BSD Code}, and the file @file{COPYING.bsd}, for more information.

The original BSD version of the @code{sccs} program can easily be found
on BSD mirrors, for example @url{ftp://ftp.freebsd.org/}.

@c Write the test cases.

@node sccsdiff, unget, sccs, Invoking Programs
@section @code{sccsdiff}
@cindex sccsdiff
@cindex sccs-sccsdiff
@cindex differences between revisions
@cindex change summary
The @code{sccsdiff} command compares two revisions stored in an
@sc{sccs} file, using the system utility @code{diff}.  Options can be
passed on to @code{diff}, for example to set the output format.  As with
the other utilities in the suite, @code{sccsdiff} will operate on a list
of s-files, but unlike most of the others, it will not process
directories named on the command line.

If you wish to compare the working copy of a file with a version stored
in the s-file, you should use the command @code{sccs diffs}
(@pxref{sccs}).

The options for @code{sccsdiff} are described below.

@table @option
@item --help
This option is provided by CSSC but not by other SCCS implementations.
It briefly describes the usage of the program.

@item --version
Indicates the version information for the @code{sccsdiff} program.

@item -p
The differences are piped through pr, rather than just being output
directly.

@item -rSID
This option is used to select a revision from the s-file.   It must be
specified exactly twice, in order to select a pair of revisions to
compare.
@end table

All other options not appearing above are passed on to the @code{diff}
program.  All the non-option arguments will be processed in turn as
@sc{sccs} files.



@node unget, val, sccsdiff, Invoking Programs
@section @code{unget}
@cindex unget
@cindex sccs-unget
@cindex Reverting to where you were before you broke it
The @code{unget} command is used to reverse the effect of @code{get
-e}.  Typically you might do this when you embark on an edit of a
file, and it all goes horribly wrong.  Using @code{unget} allows you to
revert to a previously-known state.  In fact, if you have exercised some
care in checking in new revisions, perhaps using a test suite, then
@code{unget} can be used to return you to the last working version.


@subsection Options for @code{unget}

@table @option
@item -n
Do not delete the g-file which you were editing
@item -s
Operate silently
@item -r@var{sid}
When joint editing is enabled (@pxref{Flags}), several versions may be
checked out for editing.  If this is the case, @var{sid} must be used to
indicate which edit is to be aborted.
@end table


@node val, what, unget, Invoking Programs
@section @code{val}
@cindex val
@cindex sccs-val
@cindex validating @sc{sccs} files
@cindex Validity checking
@cindex Checking sccs files for validity

The @code{val} command is used to validate a (possibly suspect)
@sc{sccs} file.  If an @sc{sccs} command reports that the checksum of
an @sc{sccs} file is incorrect, this may mean that the file has been
corrupted.  In this case, @code{val} may help to confirm this
(but @pxref{Paranoia, Why val doesn't solve the whole problem}).  

Example usages:-
@example
val s.foo 
val -mfoo s.foo 
val -r1.2 s.foo 
val s.foo s.bar SCCS/s.*
val /proj/python/spam/spam/eggs/spam
@end example

@menu
* Options for val::        Full list of options
* Validation Warnings::    Some potential problems result in warnings
* Return Value::           What val's return value means
* Paranoia::               Why your file might still be corrupt
@end menu

@node Options for val, Validation Warnings, ,val
@subsection Options for @code{val}
@table @option
@item -m@var{name}
Assert that the module name flag of the @sc{sccs} file is set to
@var{name}.  The return value of @sc{val} will be zero only if all
the other checks succeed and the history file has its module name flag
set to this value.  @xref{Flags}, for a description of the @sc{sccs}
file flags.

@item -s
Silent operation; suppress any error or warning messages that would
otherwise be emitted; the return value of the program will still
indicate the existence and general nature of any problems.

@item -V
Display version information .  This option does not exist in the
traditional @sc{sccs} implementation.

@item -r@var{wanted}
Validation will succeed if the SID @var{wanted} is valid, unambiguous,
and present in the history file. 

@item -y@var{type}
Assert that the module type flag of the @sc{sccs} file is set to
@var{type}.  The return value of @sc{val} will be zero only if all
the other checks succeed and the history file has its module name flag
set to this value.  @xref{Flags}, for a description of the @sc{sccs}
file flags.
@end table

@node Validation Warnings, Return Value, Options for val, val
@subsection Validation Warnings

Some possible problems with @sc{sccs} files are not definitively
errors.  In these situations, @code{val} will emit a warning message
but the validation will not fail (that is, if there are no other
problems the return value will be zero).  An explanation of the
possible warnings appears below.

@table @asis
@item WARNING: date for version 1.1 is later than the date for version 1.2
This message indicates that a delta exists in the history file where
the ``parent'' delta has a delta creation time which is later than the
creation time of the ``child'' delta.  This is a warning only because the
delta creation time is measured in local time, and so if two
developers with different time locale settings both edit the file in a
short period of time, this can happen.  If all the developers who
create deltas in a history file use the same timezone settings, this
should not happen.

@item Unknown special comment intro
This message is displayed when a ``c'' control line is seen in the
body of the @sc{sccs} file in which the initial ``c'' is not followed
immediately by a space.  Lines of this type are used as an extension
mechanism by some other SCCS implementations, notably the
@emph{BitKeeper} suite.   
@end table

@node Return Value, Paranoia, Validation Warnings, val
@subsection Return Value
The value returned by the @code{val} program depends on the outcome of
the validation as follows :-

@table @asis
@item 0 
Validation succeeded.  No problems were detected.  A small number of
potential problems may exist without causing a non-zero return value;
see @ref{Validation Warnings}, for more information.

@item 1
The @option{-m} option was used but the module name did not match. 

@item 2
The @option{-y} option was used but the module type did not match. 

@item 4
The @option{-r} option was used but the specified SID was ambiguous, or
not present in the history file.

@item 8
The @option{-r} option was used but the specified SID was invalid.

@item 16
Either the named file could not be opened, or it is not an @sc{sccs}
history file.

@item 32
The history file is corrupt.

@item 64
An invalid option letter was used on the command line.

@item 128
One of the files named on the command line was not present.
@end table


@node Paranoia, , Return Value, val
@subsection Why val doesn't solve the whole problem

Things that paranoid people might bear in mind are 

@itemize @bullet
@item 
Not all accidental changes to an @sc{sccs} file will necessarily make
the file invalid.

@item
Since the checksum of an @sc{sccs} file is of finite length, there is
a finite (though small) chance that a random change will not be
detected by the checksum

@item
If data is corrupted in the memory of a program, then the program will
write the incorrect data out to the history file and set the checksum
accordingly (in other words, an on-disk checksum only protects the
data while it is on the disk).  

@item
Even if @code{val} concludes that a history file is structurally valid,
this does not mean that the file contains what you thought it did (for
example, perhaps the file was corrupted by having another, valid,
@sc{sccs} file copied over it, or perhaps it was overwritten by an old
backup version).

@item 
Consumer-grade hardware (for example commodity PCs) generally lacks
error-correcting memory.
@end itemize


Things that an optimistic person might bear in mind are

@itemize @bullet
@item 
The chances of a random change simultaneously fooling the checksum and
the checks that @code{val} does are very small indeed. 

@item 
Hardware failures rarely cause file corruption.  The use of ECC memory
substantially reduces your changes of having undetected data
corruption.  

@item
When @sc{cssc} operates on an @sc{sccs} file, most of the checks that
@code{val} performs are done anyway (@sc{cssc} differs slightly in this
respect from the traditional @sc{sccs} toolset).
@end itemize

The summary is that it is theoretically possible to fool the integrity
checks performed by the @sc{sccs} file checksum and by @code{val} but
the checksum isn't fooled often and the chances of fooling both
together are very small.   The use of quality hardware reduces the
chance of data corruption yet further.



@node what, , val, Invoking Programs
@section @code{what}
@cindex what
@cindex @@(#)
@cindex identification string
The @code{what} program is designed to search in files for the
recognition string @samp{@@(#)}.  All the strings it finds matching this
are printed on standard output.

The exit status of @code{what} if zero is a matching string as found,
and 1 otherwise.  

@subsection Options for @code{what}
@code{what [-s] [-V] file [file ...]}
@table @option
@item -s
Exit successfully after finding the first string.
@item -V
Show version information for @code{what}.
@end table

@subsection Example

@cindex SCCS ID
While the file is being edited (either at first or after @samp{get -e}):-
@example
#ifndef CONFIG_NO_SCCS_IDS
static const char sccs_id[] = "%W%";
#endif
@end example

When the file is checked out for compiling (with @code{get}):-
@example
#ifndef CONFIG_NO_SCCS_IDS
static const char sccs_id[] = "@@(#)foo.c        1.3";
#endif
@end example

After compiling:-
@example
$ what foo
foo:
        foo.c       1.3
@end example

If the executable is linked from several source files, you will get a
line of output for each string containing the identification string
@samp{@@(#)}.  This is useful for finding out exactly what code went into
an executable.  This technique also works on object files, archive
libraries, text files, and in fact any sorts of files at all.

Unlike the @code{strings} command, there is no way to make @code{what}
operate on standard input.  The data would need to be written to a file
first.

The rationale for the preprocessor construct @code{CONFIG_NO_SCCS_IDS}
is that sometimes compilers or lint-pickers complain that the variable
@var{sccs_id} is unused, and defining @code{CONFIG_NO_SCCS_IDS} will
remove these @sc{id}s and thus silence the warnings.


@node Filenames, File Format, Invoking Programs, Top
@chapter Filenames

Temporary files are used during normal operation of @sc{cssc} (and
@sc{sccs}).  Many of these are given fixed names.  The prefixes for the
various files used by @sc{cssc} are listed in the table below.

@table @samp
@item s.
The history file itself.
@item p.
The file containing the list of edit locks.
@item z.
The lock file used to arbitrate access to the history file.  The running
@sc{cssc} (or @sc{sccs}) program puts its PID into this file.  Some
versions of @sc{sccs} (but @emph{not} @sc{cssc}) will break the lock
after 60 seconds if the specified PID is not running on the local
machine.  In order to work more reliably over networked filesystems,
@sc{cssc} will not do this; stale lock files would have to be removed
manually.
@item x.
Temporary file into which is written the new s-file.  Once processing is
complete, the old s-file is replaced by the x-file.
@item q.
Temporary file into which is written the new p-file
@item d.
Temporary file used by delta; contains the gotten body of the previous
version (which we run diff against).  This filename is used by @sc{sccs} 
in the same situation, but according to the @sc{sccs} manual pages, it
puts the output of @code{diff} in this file instead.
@item u.
Encoded version of the gotten file; created by delta.
@end table

All of the temporary files in the above table are created in the same
directory as the s-file, rather than in the current working directory.

Since these filenames are always fixed, it is important that the
permissions on the directory containing the @sc{sccs} file be secure;
otherwise you have a security vulnerability where a malicious user can
cause you to accidentally over-write files you own or have access to,
but they do not.  If you are the super-user, they can use this feature
to overwrite any file on the system.


@node File Format, Interoperability, Filenames, Top
@chapter File Format

This chapter provides a description of the format of @sc{sccs} files.
It is @emph{not authoritative}, and may not match some of the
peculiarities of your vendor's implementation.

@menu
* File Format Overview::	An overview of the file format
* The Header::			Format of the header of @sc{sccs} files
* The Body::			Format of the body of @sc{sccs} files 
@end menu

@node File Format Overview, The Header, , File Format
@section Overview
An @sc{sccs} file contains two parts, the header and the body.  The
header contains information about both the file as a whole and also
information about each version stored in the file.  After this comes the
body itself, which is a stream of fragments from the controlled file
interspersed with control information which indicates which versions
these fragments appear in.

Most of the control information for @sc{sccs} files appears on lines
which are marked as special by the character whose value is 1 (ASCII
SOH); this is usually referred to as @samp{^A}.  Lines in @sc{sccs}
files always end with a line feed (ASCII LF) rather than a carriage
return (ASCII CR) followed by a line feed.


@node The Header, The Body, File Format Overview, File Format
@section The Header

There are several parts to the @sc{sccs} file header:-

@iftex
@enumerate
@item The checksum line
@item The delta table 
@item The authorised users section
@item The file flags
@item The file description            
@end enumerate
@end iftex

@menu
* Checksum Line::
* Delta Table::
* Authorised User List::
* Global Flags Section::
* File Description::
* Example Header::
@end menu

@node Checksum Line, Delta Table, , The Header
@subsection Checksum
The first line of an @sc{sccs} file contains the checksum, preceded by
@samp{^Ah}.  The checksum is in decimal and is generated by adding
together the values of all the characters in the file, and taking the
result modulo 65536.  A checksum line might look like this:-

@example
^Ah36650
@end example

On systems whose C implementation considers the @code{char} type to be
unsigned, characters with their highest bit set appear to be considered
positive, and on machines with a signed @code{char} type, these
characters appear to be considered negative.  This seems to mean that
these two types of machines will not agree on the correctness of an
@sc{sccs} file's checksum.

@node Delta Table, Authorised User List, Checksum Line, The Header
@subsection The Delta Table
The checksum is followed by the delta table.  Each entry describes one
version stored in the history file, and is composed of three lines plus
some comment lines.  The first line introduces a new delta table entry
and has the form

@example
@code{^As 00001/00000/00010}
@end example

The three numbers represent the numbers of lines inserted, deleted and
unchanged in this version (with respect to its predecessor).  For the
oldest version in the history file, the numbers of lines deleted and
unchanged should be zero and the number of lines inserted is the number
of lines in the initial version of the working file.  These numbers are
always five digits long.  If the true count of inserted, deleted or
unchanged lines is greater than 99999, then the fields will still only
contain 99999.   

The second line has the form

@example
@code{^AD 1.5 68/12/31 23:59:59 james 5 4}
@end example

@noindent
Here, the @samp{D} indicates that this is a normal delta.  The only
other type of delta is the removed delta.  Removed deltas are created
with the @code{rmdel} program and are labelled with an @samp{R} instead
of a @samp{D}.  This is followed by the @sc{sid}, which will have either
two or four fields separated by a decimal point (ASCII code 46 decimal).
A @sc{sid} with only two fields (release and level) is said to be on the
trunk of the revision tree.  A @sc{sid} with the full four fields (the
last two are the branch number and the sequence number) is said to be a
``branch revision''.  Each field in the @sc{sid}, if present, must
contain a positive integer no larger than 9999.  This means that
@samp{1.0} would not be a valid version number, for example.

The third and fourth fields on this line are the date and time at which
this delta was added to the history file (rather than, for example, the
modification time of the working file which was checked in).  The year
is represented with only two digits, and is deemed to be in the range
1969 to 2068 (@pxref{Year 2000 Issues}).  Despite having only two year
digits, the date is in ISO order (year/month/day).  The time is
indicated using 24-hour clock notation.  The date in the above example
is the latest date it is possible to represent in an @sc{sccs} file.

The fifth field is the name of the user who checked this version in.
For the gratification of pedants, it should be noted that this is the
name associated with the @emph{actual} user-id rather than the
@emph{effective} user-id, or the name appearing in the system log as the
user who logged in on the controlling terminal.

The final two fields are called @dfn{delta sequence numbers}, or
@dfn{seqnos}.  They are for the internal use of the implementation and
should not be confused with ``sequence numbers'', which are the final
fields of four-field (``branch'') @sc{sids}.  The seqno of the delta
added last will be larger than that of any other delta.  Each delta has
a unique seqno.  The first of these two fields is the seqno of this
delta itself, and the second field is the seqno of its predecessor (that
is, the version which had been checked out with @code{get -e}).  The
seqno 0 is special and appears only as the (nonexistent) predecessor of
the first delta.

Since the delta table entries appear in reverse order of addition
(i.e. new entries are always added at the top), the initial delta appears
at the foot of the delta table.  Many of the @sc{sccs} utilities define
their cutoffs in such a way that they can stop traversing the delta
table when they find a delta which is too old.

After the @samp{^Ad} line there may be several lines which indicate
lists of included, excluded or ignored sequence numbers for this delta.
I don't understand this area of the functionality of @sc{sccs} very
well, so any description here may be vague or incorrect.  The CSSC
implementation may also be incomplete in this area.

The list of included seqnos is introduced with @samp{^Ai}, the
excluded seqnos with @samp{^Ax}, and ignored seqnos with @samp{^Ag}.
These are followed by a space character, and then the list itself, which
is a space-separated list of integers.

If the @sc{mr}-validation flag (@pxref{Flags}) was turned on at the time
of the creation of this delta, one or more lines of the form

@example
^Am mr1
^Am mr2
^Am mr3
^Am mr4
@end example

These lines constitute a list of Modification Request Numbers, one on
each line.

The next part of the delta table entry is the the delta commentary.
This comment is intended to contain a description of the changes made in
this delta, and is written and read by humans.  This may extend over one
or many lines, each introduced with @samp{^Ac}, like this:-

@example
^Ac The end of the world
^Ac as we know it
@end example

If there is no comment for a particular delta, because it was suppressed
with the @code{-y} option to @code{delta} or @code{cdc}, or because the
user was presented with a prompt for comments but just typed the return
key, an empty @samp{^Ac} control line will appear at this point.  The
comment block, and in fact the whole delta table entry, is terminated by
a control line of the form

@example
^Ae
@end example

CSSC is currently slightly incorrect in this area.  If the comment is
suppressed with the @code{-y} option, it emits no @samp{^Ac} lines at
all.


To illustrate this further, here are two more delta table entries from
an @sc{sccs} file:-

@example
^As 00001/00000/00007
^Ad D 1.2 99/12/31 23:59:59 mcvoy 2 1
^Ac Added an extra line
^Ae
^As 00007/00000/00000
^Ad D 1.1 69/01/01 00:00:00 dmr 1 0
^Ac created at the dawn of time
^Ae
@end example

@node Authorised User List, Global Flags Section, Delta Table, The Header
@subsection Authorised User List
Next, there is the list of authorised users, intorduced by a @samp{^Au}
line.  Only users in the authorised users list can modify the @sc{sccs}
file.  This list always appears (though many implementations will not
complain if you remove it with an editor) but is often empty.  One user
login name appears on each line.  Lines can alternatively contain
numbers, denoting whole groups of users (as listed in @file{/etc/group}
on many systems).  The authorised-users list is terminated with a
@samp{^AU} line.  Some broken implementations emit lines of the form
@samp{^AU 0} here instead; the polite thing to do is to ignore gaffes of
this sort.

@node Global Flags Section, File Description, Authorised User List, The Header
@subsection The Global Flags Section

The file flags section occurs after the authorised-users list.  Each
file flag occurs on a separate line and are possibly followed by their
values (except the boolean flags, whose mere presence is sufficient).
These lines look like this:-

@example
^Af f e 0
^Af f n 
^Af f q Q-flag-value
^Af f v /bin/true
@end example


The @samp{e} flag, if set to a nonzero value, indicates that the
controlled file is binary and is therefore stored in uuencoded form in
the file body.  If this flag is set to zero or is missing, then the file
body is not encoded.  See @ref{Flags} for information about the other
possible flag letters and their meanings.  See @ref{Interoperability}
for information about sharing @sc{sccs} files with other implementations
of @sc{sccs}.


@node File Description, Example Header, Global Flags Section, The Header
@subsection File Description
The flags section is followed by the descriptive text for the history
file.  This section is intended to contain text which might contain a
copyright statement, or might indicate the purpose of a file or contain
special instructions, and so on.  This section starts with a @samp{^At}
control line and is terminated with a @samp{^AT} control line:-

@example
^At
This is the blah blah...
... blah.
^AT
@end example

The @samp{^AT} control line marks the end of the @sc{sccs} file's
header.  The following line is the first line of the file body.


@node Example Header, , File Description, The Header
@subsection Example SCCS File Header

This example also includes the file body, since the body is short.

@example
^Ah38213
^As 00002/00000/00000
^Ad D 1.3 98/11/22 18:25:43 james 3 2
^Ax 2
^Am 99
^Ac This delta was produced using "get -e -x1.2 s.foo" and 
^Ac then "delta s.foo".
^Ae
^As 00001/00000/00000
^Ad D 1.2 98/11/22 18:22:56 james 2 1
^Am mr1
^Am mr2
^Am 
^Ac comment goes here.
^Ae
^As 00000/00000/00000
^Ad D 1.1 98/11/22 18:21:11 james 1 0
^Ac date and time created 98/11/22 18:21:11 by james
^Ae
^Au
^AU
^Af e 0
^Af n
^Af q UMSP
^Af v /bin/true
^At
Descriptive text
^AT
^AI 3
this delta was made from a working file which was gotten for editing
but excluded the delta named 1.2.
^AE 3
^AI 2
blurg
^AE 2
^AI 1
^AE 1
@end example





@node The Body, , The Header, File Format
@section The Body

The body of an @sc{sccs} file is usually much longer than its header,
but contains fewer ingredients.  It contains control lines, which signal
the beginning or end of a chunk of user data, and the user data itself.
If, for example, you added the text @samp{I was here} to the controlled
file as a delta whose delta sequence number was 7, the history might
contain these lines:-

@example
^AI 7 
I was here
^AE 7
@end example

I currently have no clear understanding of the interaction of excluded,
included or excluded revisions with the normal check-in processing.
Hence I can't thoroughly explain the precise meaning of the @samp{^AI},
@samp{^AE} and @samp{^AD} control lines.  This section will be completed
at a future date.  If you have an understanding of these issues, please
let me (@email{jay@@gnu.org}) know.

@c TODO: complete this section.


@node Interoperability, Environment, File Format, Top
@chapter Interoperability

This part of the @sc{cssc} manual describes how @sc{cssc}
interoperates with @sc{sccs}.  For the enormous majority of cases,
this occurs seamlessly; however sometimes it is not possible for
@sc{cssc} to pick ``one right way'' to proceed unaided.  Circumstances
where this occurs are described in detail, below.

In order to interoperate better with other implementations of
@sc{sccs}, the @sc{cssc} suite can also be configured to turn off
several features which provide flexibility beyond that which is
available in some other implementations of @sc{sccs}.  Some other
interoperability features of @sc{cssc} exist to maintain compatibility
but do not need to be turned off.

@menu
* Binary File Support::      Enabling or disabling support for binary files.
* Maximum Line Length::      Limiting the length of lines in the SCCS file.
* Limitations of diff::      Diff has limits too, on many non-GNU systems.
* Configuration::            Viewing the current configuration.
* Bug-for-Bug::              We go to great lengths to be compatible
* Incompatibilities::        Sometimes we cannot be fully compatible
* SCCS Version Differences:: Versions of @sc{sccs} behave inconsistently
@end menu

@node Binary File Support, Maximum Line Length, , Interoperability
@section Binary File Support
Binary file support can be turned off when you run ``configure'' by
specifying the @code{--disable-binary} option.  This will cause
@code{admin} to refuse to create an SCCS file whose ``e'' flag is set
(@pxref{Flags}).  The @code{admin} program would normally do this if the
user requested it via the @code{-b} option or if it discovered that the
file could not safely be stored in the normal @sc{sccs} file format.

This setting can be overridden with the environment variable 
@env{CSSC_BINARY_SUPPORT}; for a description of how to use this
environment variable, see @ref{Environment}.

If you use @sc{cssc} with support for encoded SCCS files turned off,
encoded files will still be handled; @sc{cssc} will just refuse to
create a new one.  This provides as great a degree of interoperability
with other implementations of @sc{sccs} as possible.

@node Maximum Line Length, Limitations of diff, Binary File Support, Interoperability
@section Maximum Line Length

By default, CSSC enforces no line length limits.  The @sc{cssc} tools
will correctly process input files containing lines of arbitrary
length, subject to the limits of available memory.  The system command
@code{diff} may impose its own limit however; this is discussed below
(@pxref{Limitations of diff}).

If you are working with a binary file (that is, the @samp{-b} option
to @code{admin} was used when the history file was created), the
encoding mechanism used by @sc{cssc} (and those @sc{sccs}
implementations that support binary files) ensures that data is
encoded before being stored in the body of the history file, and so
the ``binary'' file can contain any sequence of bytes at all - the
``line length'' is no longer important.

Most other implementations of @sc{sccs} do however have an upper limit
on the maximum length of line that can be handled in a text file (that
is, those versions of @sc{sccs} which have such a limit do not apply
this limit for binary files).  To set such a limit in @sc{cssc}, use
the @code{--enable-max-line-length=N} option to ``configure''.  This
sets the limit to the specified value.

This setting can be overridden with the environment variable
@env{CSSC_MAX_LINE_LENGTH}; for a description of how to use this
environment variable, see @ref{Environment}.  To determine the current
setting of the line lenght limit, run @code{admin -V} and read the
output.

If (and only if) you have configured CSSC with such a maximum line
length limitation, the lengths of input lines are checked as they are
being read.  When @sc{cssc} is adding a new delta to an existing file,
if it finds an input line which is longer than N characters, it will
fail with an explanatory message (the alternative would be that an
SCCS file would be generated that could not be read by other 
implementations of @sc{sccs} having a lower line length limit).

When @sc{cssc} is creating a new SCCS file in response to the
@code{admin -i} command, one of two things will happen when an
over-length line is found.  If binary file support is enabled, the
@sc{sccs} file will automatically be created as an encoded file.
Otherwise, @code{admin} will fail with an explanatory message.

When the @sc{cssc} tools are reading a history file, the lines in the
@sc{sccs} file are not subject to the limits described above; that is,
@sc{cssc} imposes these limits on lines it puts @emph{into} the
@sc{sccs} file, but not on lines it reads @emph{from} the @sc{sccs}
file.  This means that the @sc{cssc} @code{get} utility will cope with
arbitrarily long lines in the @sc{sccs} file, even if @sc{cssc} has
been configured in sauch a way that @code{delta} would not put such
long lines into the history file.

@node Limitations of diff, Configuration, Maximum Line Length, Interoperability
@section Limitations of diff

The @code{diff} utility may have limits on the lengths of lines that
it can process, though the GNU @code{diff} program has no such limits.
This means that if you are using @sc{cssc} in combination with a
@code{diff} which has a line length limit, that limit will apply to
the operation of the @sc{cssc} @code{delta} and @code{sccsdiff}
programs (though not to any other component of @sc{cssc}).  

This kind of problem may cause @code{delta} to fail because the file
you are checking in contains an over-length line.  However, because
@sc{sccs} files may be operated on by @sc{sccs} implementations that
have different upper limits, you might also find that the delta you
checked out from the history file already contained a line which is
longer than can be coped with by your @code{delta} utility.  GNU
@sc{cssc} can always be switched back a mode in which there is no line
length limit (i.e. the mode which is usually the default) and so can
be used to work around such situations. 

Bear in mind that implementations of @code{diff} and @sc{sccs} on a
given system can have @emph{different} limits on the sizes of lines
that can be handled by @code{delta}, @code{get} and @code{diff}.  This
is not the case with the GNU system however, which has no such limits.

The @code{diff} utility will also fail if the last line in one of the
files being compared does not end in a newline.  To work around this
you can either encode the file as a binary file (@pxref{admin}) or add
a terminating newline (which is usually the best course of action).

The @code{diff} program to be used by the @sc{cssc} tools is selected
when the @code{configure} script is run, before @sc{cssc} is compiled.
@ref{Configuration} explains how you can determine which diff command
is used by @sc{cssc}.

@node Configuration, Bug-for-Bug, Limitations of diff, Interoperability
@section Checking the Current Configuration
To discover how a particular installation of @sc{cssc} is configured,
pass the @code{-V} option to any of the @sc{cssc} tools.  The
``configure'' script defaults to not limiting the maximum line length,
but you must specifically indicate if binary file support is to be 
enabled or not when running ``configure''.

@c The configuration options in effect at the time this file was formatted
@c are as below :-
@c 
@c @include config-info.texi

@node Bug-for-Bug, Incompatibilities, Configuration, Interoperability
@section Bug-for-Bug Compatibility

Some other implementations of @sc{sccs} have bugs, too.  Where we know
about these and can work around them, we do this.  Please not that
these bugs only affect @emph{some} other versions of @sc{sccs} - if
they affected all versions, they'd be the correct behaviour of
@sc{cssc} too!

@itemize @bullet
@item
Some versions of @sc{sccs} had a Y2K-related problem where the tens
digit in the year fields within the delta table of the SCCS file
contains a colon (`:') rather than a digit.  When reading files,
@sc{cssc} correctly understands this to be a zero and issues a warning
message.  The fault is corrected if the SCCS file is being modified.
@xref{Year 2000 Issues}.

@item
Some versions of the Data General implementation were changed to use
four-digit years in the p-file instead of two-digit years, apparently
as part of a Y2K-fix.  While arguably this in fact might have been the
right way to fix the problem, none of the other @sc{sccs}
implementations went along with the idea. @xref{Year 2000 Issues}.  If
the file is being modified, the year is written back out as a
two-digit field.  

@item
Although it is unusual for SCCS files to have ``^A m'' lines after
``^A c'' lines, this does sometimes occur.  CSSC accepts either
order, but always emits the MR numbers before the comments for each
delta.

@item
CSSC accepts ``^A m'' lines with no argument, although this is
unusual.   This may in fact not actually be a bug.

@item 
Some versions of @sc{sccs} (allegedly some versions of the Sun Code Manager
product) emit lines of the form ``^AU 0'' instead of ``^A U''.  CSSC
accepts either but only produces the latter.  Similar situations
exist for lines of the form ``^At 0'' and ``^A T 0''.
@end itemize

@node Incompatibilities, SCCS Version Differences, Bug-for-Bug, Interoperability
@section Incompatibilities

There are some features of @sc{sccs} implementations with which
@sc{cssc} cannot maintain compatibility.  

@itemize @bullet
@item
The @sc{cssc} behaviour of correcting the problems mentioned above may
not be compatible with those versions of @sc{sccs} which actually
exhibit those problems (then again, some of them are not able to read
their own output in these circumstances, either).

@item
The BitSCCS product, part of the BitKeeper suite, uses special comment
lines in the delta table, of the form ``^Ac_'' where ``_'' is some
character other than a space.  When @sc{cssc} sees these, it will
avoid changing the SCCS file (though it will still work for read-only
operations, even though the significance of the special comment is
ignored).
@end itemize

@node SCCS Version Differences,, Incompatibilities, Interoperability
@section SCCS Version Differences

This section outlines some of the ways in which various versions of
@sc{sccs} differ from each other and therefore sometimes from
@sc{cssc}.  

@subsection Binary file support and line lengths

The various versions of @sc{sccs} differ in their level of support for
binary files (@pxref{Binary File Support}), and in the maximum line
length that they will support (@pxref{Maximum Line Length}.

@subsection sccsdiff

There are some small variations in the way that the several versions
of @code{sccsdiff} behave.  These are outlined in the table below :-

@table @asis
@item Solaris 8
Prints a separator line between the @code{diff} output for each
s-file.  This separator is output before the first set of diff output, 
even if only one s-file has been named on the command line.

@item Solaris 2.6 and many other versions of Unix
Does not print a separator.
@end table

@subsection admin

There are a few differences in the behaviour of the @code{admin}
command across the various SCCS Implementations :-

@table @asis
@item The @option{-n} option
Some versions of Dynix do not allow the use of the @option{-n} option
without the @option{-i} option.  A workaround is to use @code{-n
-i/dev/null} instead.

@item Binary file support
Most implementations of @sc{sccs} do not support the encoding of
binary files, either automatically or by the use of the @option{-b}
option to @code{admin}.  See @ref{Binary File Support}, for more
information.

@item Initial delta
The @option{-r} option is used to specify the release of the initial
delta.  Some implementations of @sc{sccs} allow this to use used to
specify more components of a @sc{sid} than just the release number.
The @sc{cssc} version of @code{admin} allows this usage but issues a
warning message.  If the @option{-r} option is used to specify a
non-trunk @sc{sid} (that is, a @sc{sid} with more than two
components), this is allowed but some of the other tools in the
@sc{cssc} suite will not work correctly on the resulting file.
@end table

@subsection prt
If the ``encoded'' flag is set, some versions of @code{prt} (but not
the @sc{cssc} version) omit a newline in the output and so the next
thing follows immediately on the same line.


@node Environment, Incomplete, Interoperability, Top
@chapter Environment Variables

Several environment variables control the behaviour of @sc{cssc}.  This
section explains what these variables are and how they work. 

@menu
* Child Processes::	    CSSC tools run other programs occasionally.
* Configuration Variables:: Variables that turn features on or off.
* Other Variables::         Miscellaneous other variables you might use.
@end menu

@node Child Processes, Configuration Variables, , Environment
@section Child Processes

Unlike some other implementations of @sc{sccs}, @sc{cssc} tools do not
usually execute each other.  This means for example that @code{delta}
does not invoke @code{get} to extract the previous version of the file,
and @code{prs} doesn't use @code{get} when processing the @code{:GB:}
keyword.

There are a small number of exceptions to this rule :-

@table @code
@item sccs
The @code{sccs} driver program can be used to invoke any of the other
tools in the suite.  @xref{Known Problems}, for a discussion of the
issues this raises.

@item delta
The @code{delta} program runs a program to validate the Modification
Request Numbers offered by the user.  @xref{Modification Request
Numbers}.

@item sccsdiff
The @code{sccsdiff} program is a shell script, and invokes
@code{get}, @code{diff} and @code{pr}, as well as other tools such as
@code{cat}, @code{test} and @code{rm}.  The @code{sccsdiff} program must
not be installed set-user-id.
@end table

The driver program @code{sccs} takes a number of precautionary steps if it
detects that is running set-user-id or set-group-id.  These steps are
described below, as part of the discussion of each environment
variable. 

@node Configuration Variables, Other Variables, Child Processes, Environment
@section Configuration Variables

When ``configure'' is run, some default behaviours are set.  These can
be overridden with the use of environment variables as described below.

@subsection CSSC_BINARY_SUPPORT

The @env{CSSC_BINARY_SUPPORT} environment variable controls whether
@sc{cssc} will create ``encoded'' @sc{sccs} files.  The three valid
values for this variable are as follows :-

@table @asis
@item @samp{enabled} 
@sc{cssc} will create encoded @sc{sccs} files if required
@item @samp{disabled}
@sc{cssc} will not create encoded @sc{sccs} files
@item unset
The default behaviour is used; this default will be the same as for
one of @samp{enabled} or @samp{disabled}.  The default is set by
passing either @code{--enable-binary} or @code{--disable-binary} to
``configure'' when @sc{cssc} is compiled.  If this option was not
specified, the default value is @samp{enabled}.  For more information
see @ref{Interoperability}.
@end table

This variable is unset by the @code{sccs} driver program, if it is
installed set-user-id or set-group-id.


@subsection CSSC_MAX_LINE_LENGTH

The @env{CSSC_MAX_LINE_LENGTH} environment variable controls the maximum
length of lines that @sc{cssc} will allow to go into an @sc{sccs} file. 
This variable should be set to a decimal integer.  

The default behaviour of @sc{cssc} when this variable is unset is
described in @ref{Interoperability}.

This variable is unset by the @code{sccs} driver program, if it is
installed set-user-id or set-group-id.

@node Other Variables, , Configuration Variables, Environment
@section Other Variables

@subsection USER

If ``configure'' detects that UIDs are not supported on the system you
are running on (that is, you are compiling on a system that doesn't look
at all like Unix) then the environment variable USER is used to
determine the invoking user's name.  This is then the name which is used
in the p-file and in the delta information for new deltas.  This
username is also compared against the list of authorised users by
@code{delta}.  Of course, this doesn't provide much security but in the
absence of user ID support, @sc{cssc} can't tell who users really are
anyway.

The behaviour of @sc{cssc} with respect to this option is not sensitive
to whether or not programs are installed set-user-id, because this
variable is only consulted on systems where set-user-id is not
supported.  This may be a problem on systems where it is possible to
grant enhanced privileges to a program, but which do not look like
Unix to the ``configure'' program. 

@subsection CSSC_SHOW_SEQSTATE

If set, the environment variable @env{CSSC_SHOW_SEQSTATE} will cause
@sc{cssc} to emit debugging information about the delta table to stderr.
This is only of use when debugging @sc{cssc}.

@subsection PROJECTDIR

The @env{PROJECTDIR} environment variable is used only by the
@code{sccs} driver program.  This variable is ignored if the the
@code{sccs} program is installed with the set-user-ID bit set.  See
@ref{Known Problems}, for other remarks concerning setuid execution.

The @env{PROJECTDIR} variable is used to locate the @sc{sccs} history
file corresponding to a filename given on the command line.  If the
value of @env{PROJECTDIR} starts with a `/', it is used as an absolute
directory name.  If @env{PROJECTDIR} does not start with a slash, it is
assumed to be the name of a user, and @sc{sccs} files are assumed to be
in the subdirectory ``src'' or ``source'' beneath their home directory.  

@subsection PATH

Normally, the @code{sccs} driver program locates the other tools by
searching the directories specified in @env{PATH}, but if it is
running set-user-id or set-group-id, a compiled-in value is used
instead.  By default, this value is is @file{/usr/sccs}.

If @sc{sccs} is not privileged, it will fall back on the compiled-in
value in order to find the other tools if they are not found in any of
the directories in @env{$PATH}.

In normal operation, @code{sccs diffs} will use the system @code{diff}
command by searching the @env{PATH} environment variable.  This doesn't
happen if it is running set-user-id or set-group-id.  

@subsection LD_LIBRARY_PATH

None of the programs in the @sc{cssc} suite take any specific action
regarding the @env{LD_LIBRARY_PATH} environment variable, but your
system libraries may take notice of it (or decide not to do so, for
example when a program is running set-user-id or set-group-id).  

@subsection TMPDIR

The @code{sccsdiff} program ignores the setting of the @env{TMPDIR}
environment variable.  Temporary files with predictable names are
created in the @file{/tmp} directory.  @xref{Known Problems}.

@subsection Locale variables

The @code{sccs} driver program uses the @code{setlocale} function, whose
behaviour depends on several implementation-dependent environment
variables.  If you are using the GNU C library, these variables are
@env{LC_COLLATE}, 
@env{LC_CTYPE}, 
@env{LC_MESSAGES}, 
@env{LC_MONETARY}, 
@env{LC_NUMERIC}, 
@env{LC_TIME}, 
and 
@env{LANG}.   The @code{setlocale} function is not called if @sc{sccs}
is running set-user-id or set-group-id.


@node Incomplete, Year 2000 Issues, Environment, Top
@chapter Missing Features and other Problems
@cindex missing features

@menu
* Missing Features::	Some features of SCCS are not provided.
* Known Problems::      Known problems with CSSC.
* Unemulated Features:: Problems with SCCS that CSSC doesn't share.
@end menu

@node Missing Features, Known Problems, , Incomplete
@section Missing Features
@itemize @bullet

@item
Documentation is incomplete or missing.  That includes this document.

@item
Some programs are missing, that is, some programs are present in the
@sc{sccs} suite and absent from this one.

@item 
@cindex Failures during multiple-file processing 
On platforms where the C++ compiler used to compile CSSC does not
support exceptions, the normal mechanism for recovering from an error
in the processing of an SCCS file is unavailable.  This means that if
such an error occurs, the program will immediately make a fatal exit,
as opposed to carrying on with the next file.  In order to fix this
problem, please either CSSC with a compiler which has working support
for exceptions, or process just one file at a time. 

@item 
@cindex Warning messages
Some programs behave subtly differently to their original counterparts.
Error messages are different, and also extra warnings are provided in
some circumstances.  All other differences are also bugs.  Please report
them (@pxref{Problems}).


@item 
@cindex Known bugs 
Known bugs are listed on the bug tracking system at 
@url{http://sourceforge.net/bugs/?group_id=8064}.  Some historical known
issues are listed in the file @file{docs/BUGS}.  Once this file has
become obsolete it will be removed from the distribution.   

If an item on the TODO list (see the file @file{docs/TODO}) has in
fact been fixed, this is a bug in the TODO list.  Please report this via
the bug tracking system. 

@item
Some programs are partially implemented.  Not all programs support all
the command-line options of their original counterparts.  Also, some
features are currently missing.  If you would like support for some
feature that is missing, please request it in the same way you would
report a bug; I'd like to know which features are required first.
@end itemize

@node Known Problems, Unemulated Features, Missing Features, Incomplete
@section Known Problems

There are a small number of known problems documented in the files
@samp{docs/BUGS} and @samp{docs/TODO}.  These will be fixed at some
point in the future.  Future problems should be reported via the
@sc{cssc} Bug Tracker, at @url{http://sourceforge.net/bugs/?group_id=8064}.


@cindex Security problems
@cindex Insecurity
@cindex Buffer overflows
@noindent
There are also some security problems with this code:-

@enumerate

@cindex Race conditions
@item Temporary file races ---
@sc{cssc} opens many temporary files, most of them with very predictable
names.   This can be used as a lever for compromising the security of a
system, often by anticipating the name of a file which will be opened at
some point, and creating a symbolic link of the same name.  Most of the
temporary files used are created in the same directory as the @sc{sccs}
file itself.   @sc{cssc} should not be used by the owners of files whose
security is important, especially to control files whose @sc{sccs} file
is in a world-writable directory.  @xref{Filenames}.

The @code{sccsdiff} program ignores the setting of the @env{TMPDIR}
environment variable.  Temporary files with predictable names are
created in the @file{/tmp} directory.

@cindex Setuid execution, why not to do it
@item Setuid execution ---
It is common to install an extra set of binaries with the set-user-id
bit turned on in their modes, to allow a specified group of users to
make revisions to some important files.  There are many ways in which a
setuid program can be used by malicious users to gain access to the
security privileges of the user as whom a program runs.  @sc{cssc} has
not been reviewed with the relevant security issues in mind.  Please do
not install @sc{cssc} programs with the set-user-id or set-group-id bits
turned on.

@item Environment variables ---
@sc{cssc} invokes external programs, notably the @code{diff} command and
the program specified as the @sc{mr} validation program.   Some
@sc{cssc} programs (for example @code{sccsdiff}) invoke others.   This
is done without ``cleaning up'' the environment, and so this is another
reason not to use the set-user-id bit for @sc{cssc} programs.
@xref{Environment}. 
@end enumerate

Please refer to the section of the GNU General Public License entitled
``NO WARRANTY'' for information regarding the lack of warranty for this
program.  @sc{cssc} is @emph{not} a secure program, please do not rely
on it to behave in a secure fashion.

Contributions of code or patches to fix these problems are, as always,
gleefully welcomed.  Please submit these to the maintainer.



Additionally, there is currently one problem that may not ever be fixed.
This problem occurs only in the @code{prt} program when the list of
ignored or excluded deltas is present for a @sc{sid} @emph{but that list is
empty}.  In this case @sc{sccs} prints the @samp{Included:} or
@samp{Excluded:} line in its output (with no numbers afterward) and
@sc{cssc} prints nothing.  Since ``fixing'' this problem would require a
horrible kludge, this has not been done.  It is not expected that this
will cause a problem for any users; if this is a problem for you, let
the maintainer know and it will be fixed.



@node Unemulated Features, ,Known Problems, Incomplete
@section Unemulated features

There are some features of (some implementations of) the traditional
@sc{sccs} suite which it may not be desirable to copy.

@enumerate
@cindex Pipes
@item
If an @sc{sccs} file is created with the @option{-i} option, and it turns
out to need encoding, then genuine @sc{sccs} seeks back to the start of
the file and encodes it.  However, if the input file is not seekable,
for example if it is a pipe, then this doesn't always work.  The
@sc{sccs} file is then sometimes created containing only the initial
part of the body, before the offending segment of the file.  The exit
value of the @code{admin} program is nevertheless still zero.  Tests for
this situation are in @file{tests/binary/seeking.sh} but these tests are
only carried out if the program under test seems to be @sc{cssc} rather
than the genuine @sc{sccs} suite.

@item
The normal configuration for @sc{cssc} is that it supports binary files
and has no limit on line length in file with which it deals.  Both of
these features may be different to the features of some version of
@sc{sccs} with which you want to interoperate.  See
@ref{Interoperability} for more information on how to achieve better
interoperability with other implementations of @sc{sccs}.

@item
If you have a hard link to an @sc{sccs} file, then @sc{sccs} programs
would ``break'' the hard link because the @sc{sccs} file is
rewritten.  For this reason, @sc{sccs} checks the link count on the
file before using it.  The @sc{sccs} suite also does this.  While
@sc{cssc} does this consistently, @sc{sccs} does not - for example the
@sc{val} program does not do this check. 

@c val does not do this check on Solaris 2.6.

@end enumerate

There are also a small number of respects in which various
implementations differ from each other; in such cases @sc{cssc} picks
a suitable alternative; @ref{SCCS Version Differences}.

@node Year 2000 Issues, Testing, Incomplete, Top
@chapter Year 2000 Issues
@cindex Year 2000

  Primordial (but not current) versions of the genuine @sc{sccs} suite
fail to work correctly in and after the year 2000.  The commands
affected are @code{get} and @code{prs}.  Unix vendors have ensured that
the version of @sc{sccs} that they currently ship works correctly in the
year 2000.  Sun Microsystems, for example, state in their Year 2000 FAQ
(@url{http://www.sun.com/y2000/faq.html})

@cindex Sun Microsystems, Inc.
@cindex X/Open
@quotation

@sp 1
@bullet{}
@strong{Does Sun see any problems with the source code control system
(@sc{sccs})?}
@c @* causes a line break.
@*
No, Sun has adopted the X/Open Commands and Utilities Issue 5 
standard, the year 2000 compliant version of @sc{sccs} will 
not be affected by the end of century transition.  The X/Open 
standard states that old dates held in ("yy/mm/dd") format does 
not change in ``s.'' files, but the values ``yy'' which range 
from 69 -- 99 are to be interpreted as 1969 -- 1999 respectively. 
Values of ``yy'' which range from 00 -- 68 are to be interpreted 
as 2000 -- 2068 respectively.  This interpretation ensures that 
the year 2000 compliant version of @sc{sccs} will work at least 
to the year 2068.  By implementing X/Open's standard, Sun has 
ensured @sc{sccs} user's compatibility with other providers of
the @sc{sccs} utility.  For more information please refer to: 
@url{http://www.xopen.org/public/tech/base/year2000.html}

@sp 2
Copyright @copyright{} 1994 -- 1997 Sun Microsystems, Inc.,
901 San Antonio Road, Palo Alto, CA 94303 USA.
All rights reserved.
@sp 2

@end quotation

@menu
* The Good News::       CSSC works with all dates from 1969 to 2038...
* The Bad News::        ...but with hiccups on some operating systems.
* Year 2000 Summary::   Parting words on date issues
@end menu

@node The Good News, The Bad News, Year 2000 Issues,  Year 2000 Issues
@section The Good News

Two-digit years are a problem in two places: firstly, within the actual
@sc{sccs} files, and secondly within command-line options.  The
two-digit year fields in the @sc{sccs} files are correctly dealt with
according to the strategy mandated by X/Open.  The command-line options
are also dealt with similarly.

@sc{cssc} provides an additional feature for your convenience.  If the
argument to the @option{-c} option of @code{get}, @code{prt}, or
@code{prs} contains more than twelve digits, the first two are
understood to be the century part of the year.  For example,
@samp{971120193000} and @samp{19971120193000} both represent exactly the
same time (7:30 p.m. on November 20, 1997).  The fields of a date can be
separated with other (non-digit) characters, and so
@samp{1997/11/20-19:30:00} also denotes the same time (but
@samp{1997/11/20} is an error because there are fewer than twelve
digits).

Some versions of SCCS are not year 2000 compliant and write incorrect
timestamps into SCCS files.  @sc{cssc} correctly understands the
intended date, and will fix this problem when re-writing the file
(@pxref{Bug-for-Bug,,Bug-for-Bug Compatibility}). 

@sc{cssc} represents dates internally in a way that works for
Gregorian dates up to at least the year 32767 AD on all systems.  Some
countries didn't recognise the Gregorian calendar system until the
early twentieth century but this of course is not really a problem
now.  The useful life of @sc{sccs} is from 1969 until 2068.  Years are
stored in two-digit form in @sc{sccs} files and so although @sc{cssc}
has no such limits internally, it's not possible to indicate a year
outside this range in an @sc{sccs} file if you want to retain
compatibility with other implementations of @sc{sccs}.  All the
@sc{cssc} programs will successfully work with any date in this range,
all the way up to 2068, on all systems.

In this future, years after 2068 may be represented as four-digit
fields, but @sc{cssc} doesn't do this yet.  

The @sc{cssc} test suite (@pxref{Testing,,The Test Suite}) contains
some test files which may be useful in determining the date range with
which your usual @sc{sccs} implementation will cope.  These are in the
directory @file{tests/year-2000}.

@node The Bad News, Year 2000 Summary, The Good News,  Year 2000 Issues
@section The Bad News

It's not all good news though.  When new deltas are created with the
@code{delta} command, @sc{cssc} must consult the operating system to
find the current date and time.  Some operating systems have a limited
range of date representation.  For example, the development system I use
for most of the work on @sc{cssc} can't report any date later than
Tuesday Jan 19 03:14:07 2038 as the current time.  When running on such
systems, @sc{cssc} will still be able to work with @sc{sccs} files
containing dates after this, but activities involving the current time
will not work correctly. 

This date breakdown occurs most obviously with the date stamp that the
@code{delta} program gives each delta in the @sc{sccs} file, but also
with the commentary-change message of @code{cdc} and the default comment
produced by @code{admin} when an @sc{sccs} file is created.

@node Year 2000 Summary, , The Bad News,  Year 2000 Issues
@section Summary

To summarise, all reporting activities of @sc{cssc} will work correctly
throughout the range of time representable in an @sc{sccs} file (that
is, from 1969 to 2068 inclusive).  However, commands which modify
@sc{sccs} files and need to add dates may fail earlier than this (but
then again, may not, depending on your operating system).


Now that you know that whatever version of @sc{sccs} you are using has
probably been fixed by the vendor, and that even if your vendor's
@sc{sccs} implementation cannot be updated for some reason, @sc{cssc} is
Year-2000 compliant and to an extent Year-2038 compliant, I'd like you
to remember the conversion effort that this has saved you.  I'd also
like to urge to to actually use that effort to convert your existing
projects from @sc{sccs} to a more modern version control system, for
example GNU CVS.  There are other considerations besides Year-2000
compliance, after all.  @sc{cssc} is not called ``Compatibly Stupid
Source Control'' for nothing.



@node Testing, Problems, Year 2000 Issues, Top
@chapter The Test Suite
@cindex test suite


The test suite is the most important single component of the @sc{cssc}
suite.  It ensures that ports to new platforms are working correctly,
and that changes in one part of the suite don't accidentally break
anything else.

The test suites cannot cover everything.  More are needed.  If you only
ever contribute one thing to CSSC, make it a new test case.  This
chapter explains how to run the test suite and also how to write new
test cases.

@menu
* Running the tests::           Running the test cases.
* Writing new test cases::      Writing new test cases.
@end menu

@node Running the tests, Writing new test cases, , Testing
@section Running the tests
@cindex testing
@cindex Checking the suite
  Running the test cases is quite simple.  Typically, you might do it
after compiling but before installing @sc{cssc}.  After running
``configure'', you might compile @sc{cssc} with

@example
make
@end example

and test it with

@example
make check
@end example

@noindent
The full test suite takes just over five minutes to run on a 486 running
Linux.  If everything works correctly, you will see messages like:-

@smallexample
cd tests && make all-tests
make[1]: Entering directory `..../CSSC/compile-here/tests'
cd ../lndir && make
make[2]: Entering directory `..../CSSC/compile-here/lndir'
make[2]: `lndir' is up to date.
make[2]: Leaving directory `..../CSSC/compile-here/lndir'
../lndir/lndir ../../Master-Source/tests 
../../Master-Source/tests/get:
command-names: .././common/command-names
test-common: .././common/test-common

@exdent ...more messages from lndir...

/bin/sh -ec 'cd admin && for i in *.sh ; \
do \
	/bin/sh $i || break; \
done'
C1...passed 
C2...passed
@exdent .... more output ....
C12...passed 
C13...passed 
PASS comment.sh:
v1...passed 
@exdent .... more output ....
b11...passed 
b12...passed 
PASS flags.sh:
@exdent .... more output ....
Tests passed.
make[1]: Leaving directory `..../CSSC/compile-here/tests'
@end smallexample

If something goes wrong you will see a ``FAIL'' message, which looks
something like this:-

@smallexample
C1...FAIL comment.sh C1: ../../admin -ifoo s.new.txt: 
Expected return value 0, got return value 1
make[1]: *** [test-admin] Error 1
make[1]: Leaving directory `..../CSSC/compile-here/tests'
Tests failed.
make: *** [all-tests] Error 2
@end smallexample

@noindent
The thing to remember is that when you run @code{make check}, the
@code{make} program will print on the last line a message saying
``Error'' only if the tests have failed.


If the test suite does indicate that the tests have failed, please
submit a bug report (@pxref{Problems}).  Please include in your bug
report 

@itemize @bullet
@item
The output of the test suite (you may find the Unix @code{script}
program invaluable for this)

@item 
The contents of the directory containing the test that failed (if you
compiled with separate source and object directories, I just want the
one in the ``object'' directory).

@item
As much information about your system as you think is useful, for
example the names and versions of the operating system and compiler that
you are using.
@end itemize


If you want to run just some of the tests, there are rules in the
makefile for just running some of them.  For example, the tests in the
directory @code{tests/admin} can be run with @code{make test-admin}.
Each test directory is named after one of the @sc{cssc} programs.  This
indicates which program the tests concentrate on verifying.  Inevitably
these tests will use more than just one @sc{cssc} program; for example,
most of the tests involve using @code{admin} to create a @sc{sccs} file
in the first place.  However, the directory indicates which tool those
tests concentrate on.

If is possible for a test to neither pass or fail, but just go wrong.
This can happen when the test script comes upon something that prevents
the test itself working correctly, for example, because it can't remove
a temporary file or uudecode a built-in sample @sc{sccs} file.  When
this happens you get output much like this:-

@example
$ sh flags.sh 
rm: foo: Permission denied
flags.sh: Test could not be completed
@end example

@noindent
The part before the colon (@code{flags.sh}) indicates which script could
not be completed.  No further tests will be attempted.  Diagnosing the
problem may or may not be simple.  In this case, it's not hard; the
problem is that the test suite is trying to clear away any temporary
files but it can't remove the file ``foo'' (because the current
directory was made read-only to force the test to miscarry, in this
contrived case).  When the test suite miscarries like this and you can't
find the problem, please follow the bug-reporting procedure
(@pxref{Problems}), but please indicate that its a miscarriage in the
test suite rather than a concrete test failure.


@node Writing new test cases, , Running the tests, Testing
@section Writing new test cases
@cindex Contributing test cases

The test cases are really just shell scripts.  They are suitable for
@code{/bin/sh} on most machines.  The procedure for running these is
explained in @ref{Running the tests}.  These shell scripts read in some
common function definitions (mostly from
@code{tests/common/test-common}) and then proceed to conduct the tests.
This section explains those commands used in the test scripts that are
not simply normal shell commands.  Normal shell commands like @code{sed}
and @code{grep} are not described.

The best approach for writing new test scripts or just individual new
test cases is to first think of some aspect that needs better test
coverage, and then to write the test script, basing it on an existing
script.  To make sure that your new tests are really checking for the
right things, you can run them against an existing @sc{sccs}
implementation other than @sc{cssc}.

@menu
* Testing the Test Suite: testing tests.   How to test the test suite itself
* docommand::                              Run a command, checking its return value and output.
* remove::                                 Remove a file if it is present.
* success::                                Declare that a test has passed.
* fail::                                   Declare that a test has failed.
* echo_nonl::                              Print a string without a following argument.
* miscarry::                               When a test case cannot be run.
* real-thing::                             Some test scripts need to know which features to expect.
* need-prt::                               Not all implementations have prt
@end menu


@node testing tests, docommand, , Writing new test cases
@subsection Testing the Test Suite

The best strategy for testing the @sc{cssc} test suite itself is to
run it against a genuine edition of @sc{sccs}, if you have one
available.   Before running @code{make check}, set the environment
variable @samp{dir} to point to the directory containing the programs
to be tested; this should usually be @w{@file{/usr/sccs}}.  

In many implementations of @sc{sccs}, some of the tools execute others
(for example, @code{delta} often executes @code{get} to retrieve the
previous version of the controlled file).  This means that to
correctly test the test suite, your @code{PATH} environment variable
should be set up to select the @sc{sccs} tools you want to test.  Here
is an example of the correct way to set up the environment to test
@sc{sccs} tools in @file{/usr/ccs/bin} :-

@example
dir=/usr/ccs/bin
PATH=/usr/ccs/bin:$PATH
export dir
make check
@end example

When you are sure that the test script is expecting the correct
behaviour from programs under test, you can then run it against
@sc{cssc}.  After all, if you're going to set out writing your test by
assuming that @sc{cssc} is correct in the area under test, of what
value is the test?

@node docommand, remove, testing tests,          Writing new test cases
@subsection docommand
@cindex docommand

  The @code{docommand} function runs a specified program, and checks its
return value, standard output and error output against an expected
version.  If any mismatch occurs, @code{fail} is called.  The
@code{docommand} function is invoked with up to six arguments:-

@example
docommand [--silent] @var{label} @var{command} @var{retval} @var{stdout} @var{stderr}
@end example

The @code{docommand} function normally prints the label to indicate what
stage the current test script has reached, followed by ``done'' when it
has finished.  The @code{--silent} option turns off this behaviour, so
that if nothing goes wrong, no progress message is printed.  This is
occasionally used for commands that have already been tested by a script
and are known to work, but which must be repeated several times in order
to make some other kind of test, which is yet to come.  I recommend you
try to avoid using this option.

The other arguments to @code{docommand} are:-

@table @var
@item label
This is what is printed to indicate what is going on when the test
starts.  If all goes according to plan, it is followed by
@samp{...done}.

@item command
This is the command to be executed, will all the required arguments.

@item retval
This is the expected return value.  If @var{command} exits returning any
other value, @code{fail} will be called.  If the test should not care
about the return value, use @samp{IGNORE} as @var{retval}.

@item stdout
This is the text expected on the standard output of @var{command}.  If
the test should not care about the standard output, use @samp{IGNORE} as
@var{stdout}.

@item stderr
This is the text expected on the error output of @var{command}.  If
the test should not care about the error output, use @samp{IGNORE} as
@var{stderr}.
@end table

This command will run @code{admin} with three arguments, and expect it
to produce no output at all and return the value zero:-

@example
docommand C5 "$@{admin@} -ifoo -yMyComment $s" 0 "" ""
@end example


This command does something similar, but the command is expected to
fail, returning 1 as its exit status:-
@example
# We should not be able to admin -i if the s-file already exists.
docommand I7 "$@{admin@} -ifoo $s" 1 "" IGNORE
@end example

@noindent 
In the example above, the error messages produced by @sc{sccs} and
@sc{cssc} are different, but both indicate the same thing.  However,
since the messages are different, @samp{IGNORE} is used.


The @var{stdout} and @var{stderr} arguments are processed with the
@code{echo_nonl} function, and so escape codes are valid and indeed
heavily used:-

@example
# Test the -m (annotate SID) option with several deltas...
docommand N4 "$get -p -m $s" 0 \
    "1.1\tline1\n1.1\tline2\n1.2\tline3\n" \
    IGNORE
@end example


@node remove, success, docommand,   Writing new test cases
@subsection remove
@cindex docommand function for test scripts
  The @code{remove} function is for clearing up temporary files after
tests have finished, and for making sure that no instance of a file that
a test is supposed to create already exists before the test is made.
Typical usage is this:-

@example
f=1test
s=s.$f
p=p.$f
remove $f $s $p
@end example

@noindent
The @code{remove} function is defined as:-
@example
remove () @{ rm -rf $* || miscarry Could not remove $* ; @}
@end example

@node success, fail, remove,   Writing new test cases
@subsection success
@cindex success function for test scripts
The @code{success} function prints a message indicating that the current
test script has passed, and exits successfully.   This is always done at
the foot of a test script.   

@node fail, echo_nonl, success, Writing new test cases
@subsection fail
If a test fails, it is usually because one of the @code{docommand} calls
fails, and so direct calls to the @code{fail} function are rare.
However, if you do want to call this function directly, you should
supply as its argument a short description of what has gone wrong.  For
example, the @code{docommand} function uses @code{fail} in the following
way:-

@example
fail "$label: $1: Expected return value $2, got return value $rv"
@end example


@node echo_nonl, miscarry, fail, Writing new test cases
@subsection echo_nonl
@cindex echo
@cindex ekko
The @code{echo_nonl} function outputs its argument, without a following
newline.  Escape codes as for @code{echo(1)} are understood.  Depending
on the actual flavour of system that the test suite is running on, this
might internally use @code{echo -n} or @code{echo -e .....\c}.  

Please do not use either the @option{-n} or @option{-e} options for
@code{echo(1)} directly in test scripts, because they don't work in the
same way on all machines.  The @code{echo_nonl} function is provided for
this reason; therefore, please use it.  Please note also that while the
@code{printf(1)} command may seem superior, it absolutely cannot be used
because not all systems provide it.

Typical usage of @code{echo_nonl} might be:-

@example
echo_nonl Please wait while I finish what I am doing...
# ...
echo done
@end example


@node miscarry, real-thing, echo_nonl, Writing new test cases
@subsection miscarry

The @code{miscarry} function is used to indicate that while the test
suite has not found a problem with the programs being tested, there has
been some other kind of problem that prevents further testing.   

@noindent
Typical usage might be:-

@example
remove foo
echo '%M%' > foo
test `cat foo` = '%M%' || miscarry cannot create file foo.
@end example

@node real-thing, need-prt, miscarry, Writing new test cases
@subsection real-thing

The various implementations of @sc{sccs} vary in several different
ways, but the @sc{cssc} test suite tries very hard to pass when run
against any genuine implementation of @sc{sccs} unless it has a
definite bug.  This means for example that although the @sc{cssc}
version of @code{admin -i} will support automatic switch-over to
binary mode for a file provided via stdin, and the test suite tests
this, the same property is not required of @sc{sccs} itself.

The @file{real-thing} script checks if we are actually tesing a real
implementation of @sc{sccs}.  It sets the environment variable
@env{TESTING_CSSC} to @samp{true} or @samp{false}, depending on whether
we are testing CSSC or not.

If you are really interested in whether the implementation being
tested supports binary files or not, you should be using the
@file{config-data} script instead.

@node need-prt, , real-thing, Writing new test cases
@subsection need-prt

The possible non-availability of @code{prt} is another thing that the
@sc{cssc} test suite needs to know about in order to run successfully
against all working versions of @sc{sccs}.  Some versions of @sc{sccs}
lack the @code{prt} program.  For this reason, the tests for this tool
(in the @file{tests/prt} directory) are skipped if @code{prt} is
missing.  When writing test scripts, you should never use @code{prt}
unless you are actually testing @code{prt} itself (you can almost
always use @code{prs} instead).

If your test is specifically designed to test the functionality of
@code{prt} itself on the other hand, just source @file{need-prt}
before the first test.  The @file{need-prt} script will skip the
remainder of the invoking test script if @code{prt} is missing.  You
might use it like this, for example :-

@example
#! /bin/sh
. ../common/test-common
. ../common/need-prt
s=s.testfile
remove $s
docommand e1 "$@{prt@} $s" 1 IGNORE IGNORE
success
@end example





@node Problems, Copying, Testing, Top
@chapter Reporting Bugs
@cindex bugs
@cindex problems
@cindex maintainer

If you find a bug in GNU @code{CSSC}, please report this via the
@sc{cssc} bug tracking system at @url{http://sourceforge.net/projects/CSSC}.
Please include the version number, which you can find by giving the
option @w{@option{--version}} to any @code{CSSC} command.  Also include in
your message the output that the program produced and the output you
expected.  An @file{s.} file and instructions for reproducing the error
are almost essential unless the bug is very trivial.  If you are
unable to send the actual s-file itself due to confidentiality
concerns, you can mask the contents by using the script
@file{mogrify.awk}, which removes the contents of an SCCS file while
preserving its structure.  You will need to use @code{admin -z} on the
result in order to correct the checksum of the transformed version of
the file.  If you do this, please make sure that you
check that the problem still occurs with the transformed version of
the file.  
@refill

You may also find it helpful to join the mailing list.  See the file
@file{docs/mailing-list.txt} for information about the mailing list.

@cindex Questions about CSSC
@cindex Comments about CSSC
@cindex Suggestions for the improvement of CSSC
If you have other questions, comments or suggestions about GNU
@code{CSSC}, contact the maintainer via electronic mail to
@w{@samp{jay@@gnu.org}} .

@node Copying, BSD Code, Problems, Top
@c @ignore
@include gpl.texi
@c @end ignore

@node BSD Code, Glossary, Copying, Top
@unnumbered BSD Code
@cindex BSD
@cindex FreeBSD
The program @code{sccs}, its source code,  and its accompanying
documentation are covered by the following license:-

@sp 1
@quotation
Copyright (C) 1998, 1999 @*
	Free Software Foundation, Inc.  All rights reserved.

Copyright (c) 1980, 1993 @*
	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
are met:
@enumerate
@item
Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
@item
Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
@item
Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
without specific prior written permission.
@end enumerate

THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
SUCH DAMAGE.
@end quotation


@sp 1
The original version of the copyright notice above dates from 1993, as
you can see.  However, since that time a change has been made to the BSD
license by UCB itself.  This change is described on the following letter,
@iftex
@footnote{Obviously, while this version has been typeset, the original 
file is plain ASCII and will therefore look slightly different}
@end iftex
which is available on the BSD FTP site in the file
@file{README.Impt.License.Change} :-
@sp 1

@need 10000
@quotation 
July 22, 1999

To All Licensees, Distributors of Any Version of BSD:

As you know, certain of the Berkeley Software Distribution (``BSD'') source
code files require that further distributions of products containing all or
portions of the software, acknowledge within their advertising materials
that such products contain software developed by UC Berkeley and its
contributors.

Specifically, the provision reads:
@example
" * 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
  *    must display the following acknowledgement:
  *    This product includes software developed by the University of
  *    California, Berkeley and its contributors."
@end example

Effective immediately, licensees and distributors are no longer required to
include the acknowledgement within advertising materials.  Accordingly, the
foregoing paragraph of those BSD Unix files containing it is hereby deleted
in its entirety.


@sp 1
William Hoskins
@*
Director, Office of Technology Licensing
@*
University of California, Berkeley
@*
@end quotation
@sp 1


This change has been made to the file @file{COPYING.bsd} which
accompanies the BSD-derived code.  

@node Glossary, Concept Index, BSD Code, Top
@unnumbered Glossary

@table @asis

@item archive 
In the context of @sc{sccs} and @sc{cssc}, This means the same as
``history file''.

@item branch
Notionally, a branch is a parallel or forked stream of changes.  See
``branching''.

@item body
The actual data within the version-controlled file is called the
``body'', though this is also sometimes used to refer to that part of
the @sc{sccs} history file that contains data from the body of the
controlled file (that is, information @emph{from} the file as opposed
to information @emph{about} the file).

@item branching

Multiple lines of development are called branches; a branch is created
by editing a version of a file which already has a derived version
(e.g. editing version 1.2 when version 1.3 already exists).

@item checkin comment
The @code{delta} program asks for a checkin comment; this is a comment
which summarised the nature of the change which has just been made to
the file. 

@item controlled file
This is the (working copy of a) file which is version-controlled with
an @sc{sccs} history file (that is, a file which is managed by
@sc{sccs} or @sc{cssc}).

@item d-file
@xref{Filenames}.

@item delta
Each revision of a controlled file, as recorded in an @sc{sccs} file
is called a @emph{delta}.  This is also the name of the program used
to check in such changes to the file.

@item delta table
This is the section of the @sc{sccs} file which records information
about each change that has been made (other than the actual contents
of the file at that version).

@item excluded delta
An excluded delta is one which was specified with the @code{-x} option
to @code{get}.  See @ref{get options,,Options for @code{get}}.

@item g-file
See @emph{gotten file}.

@item gotten file
This is the working copy of the file; this is read-only unless the
file has been checked out for editing. 

@item history file
Also known as an @sc{sccs} archive or ``s-file''.  When @sc{sccs} or @sc{cssc}
is used to keep a historical record of previous versions of the
contents of a file, the file in which this historical information is
recorded is called the ``history file''.  Sometimes there are known as
``s-files'' or ``archives'' (though ``archive'' is more often used in
relation to the @code{ar} and @code{tar} utilities).

@item ignored delta
An ignored delta is one which was specified with the @code{-g} option
to @code{delta}.  @xref{delta options,,Options for @code{delta}}.

@item included delta
An included delta is one which was specified with the @code{-i} option
to @code{get}.  See @ref{get options,,Options for @code{get}}.

@item keyword
It is sometimes useful to include information in the gotten file about
what its version number is and so on.  Since this information changes
with each revision of the file, it makes sense for @sc{sccs} (or
@sc{cssc}) to keep track of this information and place it in the gotten
file accordingly.  If a file is checked out for editing, placeholders
can be edited into the file which; these are later expanded when the
file is checked out read-only.  See @ref{Keyword Substitution}.  The
same name is also sometimes used for the argument following the @code{-d}
option for @code{prs}.  See @ref{Data Keywords,,
Data Keywords for the @option{-d} option of @code{prs}}.


@item level
The second component of the @emph{SID}. 

@item MR number
Modification Request numbers; if the @samp{v} flag is set in the
@sc{sccs} file, you will be prompted for ``MR numbers'' when you check
in a new revision.  These are not used internally by @sc{cssc} but may
be used to link changes to external things (for example bug report
numbers).  @xref{delta options,,Options for @code{delta}}.

@item p-file
@xref{Filenames}.

@item q-file
@xref{Filenames}.

@item release
The first component of the @emph{SID}.

@item revision
A @emph{revision} is a specific version of a file which is controlled
with an @sc{sccs} history file.  

@item sequence number
The ``sequence number'' is a decimal number used within the @sc{sccs}
history file to identify a particular revision (or delta) of the
file.  These numbers are normally not user-visible (except in the
output of @code{prt} and @code{prs}).  These are sometimes referred to
as a ``seqno'' in order to distinguish them from the fourth component
of a SID.

@item s-file
The @sc{sccs} history file is sometimes referred to as the
@emph{s-file}.  See also @ref{Filenames}.

@item SID
Each revision of a file controlled with an @sc{sccs} history file is
identified by a ``SID''.  This is a series of numbers separated by
dots.  A complete SID always has either two components (for revisions
which lie on the trunk) or four components (for revisions that lie on
a branch).  Examples are 1.1, 1.2 (which both lie on the trunk),
1.3.1.1, 1.3.1.2 (which both lie on a branch) and 1.3.2.1 (which lies
on a different branch).  The four components of the SID are, left to
right, the @emph{release}, the @emph{level}, the @emph{branch} and the
@emph{sequence number}.  See also @emph{sequence number}, above.

@item trunk
The trunk consists of those deltas within a history file which do not
lie on branches; trunk revisions have only two components in their
SID.  Normally these are the main sequence of changes to the file.


@item x-file
@xref{Filenames}.

@item z-file
@xref{Filenames}.
@end table

@node Concept Index, , Glossary, Top
@unnumbered Concept Index

@printindex cp
@cindex tail recursion

@shortcontents
@contents
@bye
